@title The Supreme Principle of the Guru

@1
I worship  the gurus  the Lord's devotees
the Lord  the Lord's avatāras
His manifestations  and  His potencies
Kṛṣṇa  Caitanya  known as
= I worship the gurus, the devotees of the Lord, the Lord’s avatāras, His manifestations and His potencies, and the Lord Himself, who is known as Kṛṣṇa Caitanya.

@2
I worship  Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya
(and) Nityānanda  risen together
on the eastern horizon of Gauḍa  the sun and the moon
wondrous  bestowing auspiciousness  dispelling darkness
= I worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya and Nityānanda, who have risen together like the sun and the moon on the eastern horizon of Gauḍa. Wondrous and bestowing auspiciousness, They dispel the darkness.

@3
that which  non-dual  Brahman  in the Upaniṣads  that  too  His  the radiance of the body
who  the Self dwelling within  the Puruṣa  thus (called)  he  His  plenary expansion
with the six opulences  full  who  here  Bhagavān  He  Himself  this one
not  than Caitanya  Kṛṣṇa  in the world  Supreme Truth  higher  here
= What the Upaniṣads call the non-dual Brahman is only the radiance of His body. The one called the Puruṣa, the Supersoul dwelling within all, is His plenary expansion. And Bhagavān, full of the six opulences, is He Himself. In this world there is no Supreme Truth higher than Caitanya, who is Kṛṣṇa.

@4
not given before  for a long time  out of mercy  descended  in the age of Kali
to bestow  most exalted radiant rasa  the treasure of devotion to Himself
Hari  than gold  more beautiful  of radiance  by a mass  illumined
always  in the cave of the heart  may He shine  your  the son of Śacī
= “Out of mercy He has descended in the age of Kali to bestow what had not been given for a long time: the treasure of devotion to Himself, rich in the most exalted and radiant *rasa* of divine love. May that Lord Hari, the son of Śacī, resplendent with a mass of radiance more beautiful than gold, ever shine in the cave of your heart.” (Vidagdha-mādhava 1.2)

@5
Rādhā  of love for Kṛṣṇa  the transformation  pleasure-giving  potency  therefore
one in soul  although  on earth  long ago  separate bodies  assumed  They two
called Caitanya  manifest  now  those two  and  oneness  attained
with Rādhā's emotion and radiance  adorned  I bow to  Kṛṣṇa Himself
= Rādhā is the transformation of love for Kṛṣṇa; She is His pleasure-giving potency (*hlādinī śakti*). Therefore, although Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are one in soul, long ago They assumed separate forms on earth. Now the two have become one and appeared as Caitanya. I bow to Him, who is Kṛṣṇa Himself, adorned with Rādhā’s emotion and radiance.

@6
of Śrī Rādhā  of love  the greatness  of what kind  or  by Her alone
relished  by which (love)  wondrous sweetness  of what kind  or  Mine
the happiness  and  Her  from realizing Me  of what kind  or  thus  out of longing
rich with Her emotion  was born  in the ocean of Śacī's womb  the moon Hari
= “How great is Śrī Rādhā’s love? What is My own wondrous sweetness, which She alone relishes through that love? And what happiness does She feel when She realizes Me?” Longing to know this, the moon Hari, rich with Her emotion, was born from the ocean of Śacī’s womb.

@7
Saṅkarṣaṇa  lying in the Causal Ocean
lying in the Garbha Ocean  and  lying in the Ocean of Milk
Śeṣa  and  whose  portions and parts  He  Nityā-
-nanda called  Rāma  shelter  my  may be
= Saṅkarṣaṇa, Kāraṇodakaśāyī, Garbhodakaśāyī, Kṣīrodakaśāyī and Śeṣa are His portions and the parts of His portions. May that Rāma who is called Nityānanda be my shelter.

@8
beyond māyā  in the all-pervading realm of Vaikuṇṭha
full of opulence  among the divine four vyūhas
the form  whose  shines forth  called Saṅkarṣaṇa
to Him  Śrī Nityānanda-Rāma  I surrender
= Beyond māyā lies the all-pervading realm of Vaikuṇṭha, full of every opulence. There, among the four divine vyūhas, His form called Saṅkarṣaṇa shines forth. I surrender to that Śrī Nityānanda-Rāma.

@9
the master of māyā  whose body shelters the multitude of universes
lies  in person  in the midst of the Causal Ocean
whose  one portion  the blessed Puruṣa  the original Lord
to Him  Śrī Nityānanda-Rāma  I surrender
= The blessed Puruṣa, the original Lord and the master of māyā, whose body shelters countless universes, lies in person in the midst of the Causal Ocean. He is one portion of Nityānanda. I surrender to that Śrī Nityānanda-Rāma.

@10
whose  portion of a portion  the blessed Garbhodakaśāyī
from whose navel the lotus  of the multitude of worlds  the stem
of the creator of the worlds  the birthplace  of Brahmā
to Him  Śrī Nityānanda-Rāma  I surrender
= “The blessed Garbhodakaśāyī is a portion of His portion. The lotus from His navel has a stem that holds the multitude of worlds, and it is the birthplace of Brahmā, the creator of the worlds. I surrender to that Śrī Nityānanda-Rāma.” (Svarūpa Dāmodara’s diary)

@11
whose  portion of a portion of a portion  the Supersoul  of all beings
the maintainer  Viṣṇu  shines  lying in the Ocean of Milk
the upholder of the earth  whose part  he  also  Ananta
to Him  Śrī Nityānanda-Rāma  I surrender
= “Viṣṇu who lies in the Ocean of Milk, the Supersoul and maintainer of all beings, is a portion of a portion of His portion. Ananta, who upholds the earth, is also His part. I surrender to that Śrī Nityānanda-Rāma.” (Svarūpa Dāmodara’s diary)

@12
Mahā-Viṣṇu  the creator of the world
through māyā  who  creates  this (world)
His  avatāra  indeed  this
Advaita Ācārya  the Lord
= Mahā-Viṣṇu, the creator of the world, creates this universe through His energy, māyā. The Lord Advaita Ācārya is His very avatāra.

@13
(called) Advaita  being non-different from Hari
(called) Ācārya  for proclaiming bhakti
the avatāra as a devotee  the Lord  Him
Advaita Ācārya  I take shelter of
= He is called Advaita because He is non-different from Hari, and Ācārya because He proclaims devotion (*bhakti*). I take shelter of that Lord, Advaita Ācārya, who descended as a devotee.

@14
comprising the five truths  Kṛṣṇa
in the form of a devotee  in the identity of a devotee
the avatāra as a devotee  the one called a devotee
I bow to  the devotional potency
= “I bow to Kṛṣṇa, who comprises the five truths (Pañca-tattva). He appears in the form of a devotee, in the identity of a devotee, as the avatāra of a devotee, as the one called a devotee, and as the devotional potency.”

@15
all glory  to the most merciful  of the lame
my  of little intelligence  the refuge
whose lotus feet are my all in all
Rādhā  and Madana-mohana
= All glory to the most merciful Rādhā and Madana-mohana! They are the refuge of me, who am lame and of little intelligence, and Their lotus feet are my all in all.

@16
resplendent  in the forest of Vṛndāvana  a wish-fulfilling tree  beneath
in a splendid  jewelled temple  on a throne  seated
Śrī Śrī  Rādhā  Śrīla Govinda-deva
by Their dearest companions  being served  I remember
= In resplendent Vṛndāvana, beneath a wish-fulfilling tree, Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Śrīla Govinda-deva sit on a throne in a splendid jewelled temple, and Their dearest companions serve Them. I remember Them.

@17
the beautiful  who began the rasa of the rāsa dance
at Vaṁśīvaṭa  on the bank  standing
attracting  with the sounds of His flute  the gopīs
Gopīnātha  for the welfare  may He be  our
= Beautiful Śrī Gopīnātha began the sweet *rasa* of the rāsa dance. He stands on the riverbank at Vaṁśīvaṭa and draws the gopīs with the sound of His flute. May He bestow His blessings upon us.

@18
glory  glory  to Śrī Caitanya  glory  to Nityānanda
glory to Advaita-candra  glory  to Gaura's  devotees  host
= All glory, all glory to Śrī Caitanya! Glory to Nityānanda! Glory to Advaita-candra, and glory to all the devotees of Gaura!

@19
these  three  Deities  the Gauḍīyas  have made  Their own
these three's  feet  I worship  the three  my  masters
= These three Deities have made the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas Their own. I worship the feet of these three, for these three are my masters.

@20
of the book  at the beginning  I make  the invocation
guru  Vaiṣṇava  Bhagavān  of the three  remembrance
= At the beginning of this book I offer the auspicious invocation (*maṅgalācaraṇa*) by remembering three: the guru, the Vaiṣṇavas and the Lord.

@21
of the three  in remembering  there is  destruction of obstacles
easily  there is  one's own  fulfilment of desires
= Remembering these three destroys every obstacle, and one’s own desires are easily fulfilled.

@22
that  invocation  is  threefold  in kind
defining the subject  blessing  obeisance
= That invocation is of three kinds: defining the subject, giving a blessing and offering obeisances.

@23
in the first  two  verses  obeisance to the worshipful Lord
general and particular  in form  two  indeed  kinds
= In the first two verses I offer obeisances to the worshipful Lord. These are of two kinds: general and particular.

@24
in the third  verse  I make  of the subject  the definition
which  from  one knows  of the Supreme Truth  the identity
= In the third verse I define the subject, and from it one can know the identity of the Supreme Truth.

@25
in the fourth  verse  I make  to the world  blessing
everywhere  I pray for  Kṛṣṇa Caitanya's  mercy
= In the fourth verse I bless the world, praying that the mercy of Kṛṣṇa Caitanya may reach everywhere.

@26
in that  verse  I tell  the external reason for the descent
in the fifth  sixth  verses  I tell  the root purpose
= In that verse I also state the external reason for His descent. In the fifth and sixth verses I state its root purpose.

@27
in these  six  verses  Kṛṣṇa  Caitanya's  truth
then  in five  verses  Nityānanda's  greatness
= These six verses describe the truth of Kṛṣṇa Caitanya. The next five verses describe the greatness of Nityānanda.

@28
then  in two  verses  an account of Advaita's truth
then  in one  verse  of the Pañca-tattva  the explanation
= The next two verses give an account of the truth of Advaita, and one more verse explains the Pañca-tattva.

@29
in these  fourteen  verses  I make  the invocation
that  within  I tell  all  the description of the subject
= With these fourteen verses I offer the invocation, and within them I describe the whole subject.

@30
to all  the listening Vaiṣṇavas  having offered  obeisances
of all these  verses  I make  examination of the meaning
= Offering obeisances to all the Vaiṣṇavas who are listening, I shall now examine the meaning of all these verses.

@31
all  Vaiṣṇavas  listen  making  one-pointed mind
of Caitanya-Kṛṣṇa  the scriptures  as  establish
= O Vaiṣṇavas, all of you, listen with undivided attention to how the scriptures establish the truth of Caitanya, who is Kṛṣṇa.

@32
Kṛṣṇa  the two kinds of guru  devotees  avatāras  manifestations
potencies  in these  six  forms  He enjoys  pastimes
= The Lord enjoys His pastimes in six forms: as Kṛṣṇa Himself, as the two kinds of guru, as the devotees, as the avatāras, as His manifestations and as His potencies.

@33
of these  six  truths  I make  to the feet  worship
first  in general  I make  the invocation
= I worship the feet of these six truths. First I offer the invocation in a general way.

@34
I worship  the gurus  the Lord's devotees
the Lord  the Lord's avatāras
His manifestations  and  His potencies
Kṛṣṇa  Caitanya  known as
= I worship the gurus, the devotees of the Lord, the Lord’s avatāras, His manifestations and His potencies, and the Lord Himself, who is known as Kṛṣṇa Caitanya.

@35
the initiating guru  and  all  the instructing gurus
their  feet  first  I  worship
= First I worship the feet of my initiating guru and of all my instructing gurus.

@36
Śrī Rūpa  Sanātana  Bhaṭṭa  Raghunātha
Śrī Jīva  Gopāla Bhaṭṭa  Dāsa  Raghunātha
= Śrī Rūpa, Sanātana, Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa, Śrī Jīva, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa and Raghunātha Dāsa —

@37
these  six  gurus  instructing gurus  who  mine
their  all  at the lotus feet  ten million  obeisances
= these six are my instructing gurus. I offer ten million obeisances at the lotus feet of them all.

@38
of the Lord  devotees  all  Śrīvāsa  the chief
their  at the lotus feet  thousands of  obeisances
= Śrīvāsa is the chief of all the devotees of the Lord. I offer thousands of obeisances at their lotus feet.

@39
Advaita  Ācārya  Lord Caitanya's  partial avatāra
His  at the lotus feet  ten million  obeisances  my
= Advaita Ācārya is a partial avatāra of the Lord. I offer ten million obeisances at His lotus feet.

@40
Nityānanda  Rāya  Lord Caitanya's  manifestation of His own form
His  lotus feet  I worship  whose  I  servant
= Nityānanda Rāya is the manifestation of the Lord’s own form (*svarūpa-prakāśa*). I worship the lotus feet of Him whose servant I am.

@41
Gadādhara Paṇḍita and others  Lord Caitanya's  own potencies
their  all  at the feet  my  thousands of  obeisances
= Gadādhara Paṇḍita and the others are the Lord’s own potencies. I offer thousands of obeisances at the feet of them all.

@42
Śrī  Kṛṣṇa  Caitanya  the Lord  Himself  Bhagavān
His  at the lotus feet  endless  obeisances
= Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu is the Supreme Lord Himself (*svayaṁ bhagavān*). I offer endless obeisances at His lotus feet.

@43
with His associates  to the Lord  having made  obeisance
these  six  He  how (is)  I make  consideration
= Having offered obeisances to the Lord together with His associates, I shall now consider how He is present in these six.

@44
although  my  guru  Caitanya's  servant
still  know  I  His  manifestation
= Although my guru is a servant of Caitanya, I know him to be His manifestation.

@45
the guru  Kṛṣṇa's form  is  of the scriptures  by the evidence
in the form of the guru  Kṛṣṇa  mercy  shows  to the devotees
= The scriptures testify that the guru is a form of Kṛṣṇa. In the form of the guru, Kṛṣṇa shows mercy to His devotees.

@46
the ācārya  as Me  one should know
should not disrespect  ever
not  thinking him mortal  should envy
comprising all the gods  the guru
= “One should know the ācārya as Me and never disrespect him. One should not envy him, thinking him an ordinary mortal, for the guru embodies all the gods.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.17.27)

@47
the instructing guru  indeed  I know  Kṛṣṇa's  own form
the indwelling Lord  the best of devotees  these  two  forms
= I know the instructing guru to be Kṛṣṇa’s own form. He appears in two forms: as the indwelling Supersoul and as the best of devotees.

@48
not at all  attain  repayment  the wise  Your  O Lord
even with Brahmā's lifespan  (Your) deeds  with growing joy  remembering
who  within  without  of embodied beings  misfortune  dispelling
in the forms of the ācārya and the Supersoul  the way to Yourself  reveals
= “O Lord, even with a lifespan as long as Brahmā’s the wise cannot repay their debt to You, though they remember Your kindness with ever-growing joy. For You dispel the misfortune of embodied beings from within and from without, and in the forms of the ācārya and the Supersoul You reveal the way to Yourself.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.29.6)

@49
to them  constantly  united (with Me)
who worship (Me)  with love
I give  the yoga of understanding  that
by which  to Me  come  they
= “To those who are always united with Me and worship Me with love, I give the understanding by which they come to Me.” (Bhagavad-gītā 10.10)

@50
as  the Lord  to Brahmā
Himself  having instructed  made (him) realize
= “Just as the Lord Himself instructed Brahmā and made him realize the truth.”

@51
knowledge  supremely confidential  of Me
which  with realization  endowed
with its mystery  its auxiliary part  and
accept  spoken  by Me
= “Accept from Me the most confidential knowledge of Myself, endowed with realization, together with its mystery and its auxiliary part, as I now speak it.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.31)

@52
as great as  I (am)  of whatever nature
of whatever form, qualities and deeds
exactly so  realization of the truth
may there be  your  by My grace
= “By My grace, may you realize in truth exactly how great I am, what My nature is, and what My form, qualities and deeds are.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.32)

@53
I  alone  was  indeed  in the beginning
not  anything else  which  the gross, the subtle, or beyond them
afterwards  I  what  this (creation)  and
what  remains  that  am  I
= “Before creation I alone existed; there was nothing else, neither the gross, nor the subtle, nor what lies beyond them. After creation I exist, and all this creation too is I. And what remains at the end, that am I.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.33)

@54
apart from the reality (Me)  what  may appear
does not appear  and  in the Self (Me)
that  one should know  My  māyā
like a reflection  like  darkness
= “Whatever appears apart from Me, the Reality, and whatever does not appear in Me, know that to be My māyā; it is like a reflection and like darkness.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.34)

@55
as  the great  elements
in beings  great and small  after (creation)
have entered  have not entered
so  in them  not  in them  I
= “As the great elements have entered all beings, great and small, and yet have not entered them, so I am within them and yet not within them.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.35)

@56
this much  only  to be inquired into
by one who seeks the truth  of the Supreme Self
by direct and indirect means
which  is  everywhere  always
= “One who seeks the truth of the Supreme Self should inquire into this alone, by direct and indirect means: that which exists everywhere and always.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.36)

@57
Cintāmaṇi  glory to  Somagiri  guru  my
instructing guru  and  the Lord  whose crown is a peacock feather
whose  feet  of the wish-fulfilling tree  like the new leaves  at the tips
of play  of choosing her beloved  the rasa  obtains  Jayaśrī
= “Glory to Cintāmaṇi, and glory to Somagiri, my guru! Glory to my instructing guru, the Lord whose crown bears a peacock feather. At the tips of His feet, which are like the tender leaves of a wish-fulfilling tree, Jayaśrī (Śrī Rādhā) relishes the *rasa* of choosing Him as Her beloved in play.” (Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta)

@58
to the soul  directly (visible)  not  therefore  the guru  in the form of the Supersoul
instructing guru  is  Kṛṣṇa  in the form of a great devotee
= As the guru within (*caitya-guru*), the Lord is not directly visible to the soul. Therefore Kṛṣṇa becomes the instructing guru in the form of a great devotee.

@59
therefore  bad company  giving up
with the saints  should associate  the intelligent
the saints  indeed  his  cut away
the mind's attachment  with their words
= “Therefore an intelligent person should give up bad company and associate with saints. With their words the saints cut away the attachments of his mind.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.26.26)

@60
of the saints  through association  My  power  discussions
become  to heart and ear  a delight  the narrations
by relishing them  quickly  on the path of liberation
faith  attraction  devotion  will follow in order
= “In the association of saints, discussions of My power become narrations that delight the heart and the ear. By relishing them one quickly advances on the path of liberation: faith, attraction and devotion follow one after another.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.25)

@61
the Lord's  own form  the devotee  His  abode
of the devotee  in the heart  Kṛṣṇa's  constant  resting place
= The devotee is the very form of the Lord, for he is the Lord’s abode. Kṛṣṇa always rests in the heart of His devotee.

@62
the saints  the heart  My
of the saints  the heart  indeed  I
other than Me  they  do not  know
not  I  besides them  even slightly
= “The saints are My heart, and I am the heart of the saints. They know nothing but Me, and I know nothing but them, not even a little.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 9.4.68)

@63
like you  devotees
holy places  yourselves  O lord
make holy  the holy places
dwelling in their hearts  by the bearer of the club
= “My lord, devotees like you are themselves holy places. Through the Lord who holds the club and dwells in their hearts, they make even the holy places holy.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.13.10)

@64
these  devotees  are  two  kinds
eternal associates  one  practitioners  the other
= These devotees are of two kinds: the Lord’s eternal associates and the practitioners (*sādhakas*).

@65-66
the Lord's  avatāras  these three  kinds
partial avatāras  and  guṇa-avatāras
empowered avatāras  the third  thus
partial avatāras  the Puruṣas, Matsya and the rest  all
= The avatāras of the Lord are of three kinds: partial avatāras, guṇa-avatāras, who preside over the modes of nature, and, third, empowered avatāras (*śaktyāveśa*). The partial avatāras are the Puruṣas, Matsya and all the others.

@67
Brahmā  Viṣṇu  Śiva  three  as guṇa-avatāras  I count
empowered  Sanaka and the others  Pṛthu  the sage Vyāsa
= I count Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva as the three guṇa-avatāras. The empowered avatāras are Sanaka and his brothers, Pṛthu and the sage Vyāsa.

@68
in two forms  is  the Lord's  manifestation
one  indeed  prakāśa  is  the other  indeed  vilāsa
= The Lord manifests Himself in two ways: one is called *prakāśa* (manifestation), the other *vilāsa* (pastime form).

@69-70
one and the same  form  if  becomes  many forms
in appearance  indeed  difference  none  one and the same  identity
in marrying the queens  as  as  He performed  the rāsa dance
this  is called  Kṛṣṇa's  principal  prakāśa
= When one and the same form appears as many, without any difference in appearance and with a single identity, this is called Kṛṣṇa’s principal prakāśa. So He appeared when He married the queens and when He performed the rāsa dance.

@71
wonderful  indeed  this  with one
body  simultaneously  separately
in the palaces  twice eight thousand
women  He alone  married
= “How wonderful it is that with one body the Lord alone married sixteen thousand women at the same time, each separately in her own palace!” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.69.2)

@72
the festival of the rāsa  began
by the circle of gopīs  adorned
by the master of yoga  Kṛṣṇa
of them  between  each two  (of two)
= “The festival of the rāsa dance began, adorned by the circle of gopīs. Kṛṣṇa, the master of yoga, appeared between each two of them.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.3)

@73-74
by (Him) who had entered  of those embraced
around the neck  beside herself  the women
whom  might think  the sky  then
with hundreds of airships  crowded
of the gods  with their wives
by eagerness  whose minds were carried away
then  kettledrums  sounded
fell  showers of flowers
= “He entered between them and held each by the neck, so that every gopī thought He was beside her alone. Then the sky was crowded with hundreds of airships of the gods and their wives, whose minds were carried away by eagerness. Kettledrums sounded, and showers of flowers fell.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.3–4)

@75
in many places  manifestation
of a form  of one  which  at one time
in every respect  its  very identity
that  prakāśa  is called
= “When one form appears in many places at one time and is identical in every respect, it is called a prakāśa.” (Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta 1.21)

@76
one and the same  form  but  in appearance  is  different
many  manifestations  are  vilāsa  its  name
= But when one and the same form appears as many manifestations that differ in appearance, this is called vilāsa.

@77
a form  of different appearance  which
His  shines forth  for pastimes
almost  equal to Himself  in power
that  vilāsa  is called
= “When the Lord, for His pastimes, manifests a form of different appearance, almost equal to Himself in power, that form is called a vilāsa.” (Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta 1.15)

@78
such as  Baladeva  in the spiritual sky  Nārāyaṇa
such as  Vāsudeva  Pradyumna and the others  Saṅkarṣaṇa
= Examples are Baladeva, Nārāyaṇa in the spiritual sky, and Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and the others.

@79-80
the Lord's  potencies  are  three  kinds
one  the Lakṣmīs  in the city (Dvārakā)  the queens  another
in Vraja  the gopīs  and  among all  the foremost
the son of the king of Vraja  since  Himself  Bhagavān
= The Lord’s potencies are of three kinds: the goddesses of fortune (Lakṣmīs), the queens in Dvārakā, and the gopīs in Vraja. The gopīs are the foremost of all, for the son of the king of Vraja is the Supreme Lord Himself.

@81
of the original form  Kṛṣṇa's  bodily expansions  to Him  equal
devotees  together with  are  His  entourage
= These potencies are bodily expansions (*kāya-vyūha*) of Kṛṣṇa, the original form of the Lord, and they are equal to Him. Together with the devotees they form His entourage.

@82
devotees  and the others  in order  I made  of all  worship
of all these  worship  of all  good  the cause
= Thus I have worshipped them all in order, beginning with the devotees. Worship of them all is the cause of every good fortune.

@83
in the first  verse  general  invocation
in the second  verse  I make  particular  worship
= The first verse is a general invocation. In the second verse I offer worship in particular.

@84
I worship  Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya
(and) Nityānanda  risen together
on the eastern horizon of Gauḍa  the sun and the moon
wondrous  bestowing auspiciousness  dispelling darkness
= I worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya and Nityānanda, who have risen together like the sun and the moon on the eastern horizon of Gauḍa. Wondrous and bestowing auspiciousness, They dispel the darkness.

@85-86
in Vraja  who  sported  formerly  Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma
ten million suns and moons  surpassing  of both  own  effulgence
those  two  to the world  becoming  merciful
in the land of Gauḍa  on the eastern mountain  made  rising
= Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma formerly sported in Vraja, and Their effulgence surpasses ten million suns and moons. Becoming merciful to the world, these two have risen on the eastern horizon of the land of Gauḍa.

@87
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya  and  Lord  Nityānanda
whose  by the appearance  whole  world  joyful
= They are Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya and Nityānanda Prabhu, whose appearance has filled the whole world with joy.

@88-89
the sun and moon  remove  as  all  darkness
things  revealing  make  of dharma  the spreading
in this way  two  brothers  of the souls  of ignorance
of the darkness  destruction  having made  made  the gift of the Absolute Reality
= The sun and moon remove all darkness, reveal things, and so allow dharma to spread. In the same way the two brothers have destroyed the darkness of the souls’ ignorance and given them the Absolute Reality.

@90
of ignorance  of the darkness  the name  I call  cheating
the desire for dharma, wealth and pleasure  this  all
= I call this darkness of ignorance “cheating” (*kaitava*). It is the whole range of desires for religious merit (*dharma*), wealth and pleasure.

@91
dharma  from which cheating is cast out  here  supreme  of the non-envious  saints
to be known  real  here  the Reality  bestowing good  uprooting the threefold miseries
in the beautiful Bhāgavatam  composed by the great sage  what  then  with others  the Lord
at once  in the heart  is captured  here  by the fortunate  who wish to hear  instantly
= “In this beautiful *Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam*, composed by the great sage, the supreme dharma is set forth for saints free from envy, and every kind of cheating is cast out of it. Here the true Reality is to be known, which bestows the highest good and uproots the threefold miseries. What need is there of other scriptures? As soon as the fortunate wish to hear it, the Lord is captured in their hearts.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.1.2)

@92
them  among  the desire for liberation  the chief cheating
which  from  devotion to Kṛṣṇa  becomes  vanishing
= Among these the desire for liberation is the chief cheating, for it makes devotion to Kṛṣṇa vanish.

@93
by the prefix pra-  the intention of liberation  even  is rejected  thus
= “By the prefix *pra-* even the intention to attain liberation is rejected.” (Śrīdhara Svāmī, Bhāvārtha-dīpikā 1.1.2)

@94
of devotion to Kṛṣṇa  the obstacle  all  auspicious and inauspicious  action
that  one  of the soul  of the darkness of ignorance  the nature
= All action, auspicious and inauspicious, is an obstacle to devotion to Kṛṣṇa. It too belongs to the soul’s darkness of ignorance.

@95
whose  by the mercy  this  darkness  is  destroyed
darkness  destruction  having made  make  of the truth  revelation
= By the mercy of these two brothers this darkness is destroyed. Having destroyed the darkness, They reveal the truth.

@96
the Absolute Reality  Kṛṣṇa  devotion to Kṛṣṇa  in the form of love
the congregational chanting of the Name  all  bliss itself
= The Absolute Reality is Kṛṣṇa, devotion to Kṛṣṇa in the form of love (*prema*), and the congregational chanting of the Holy Name. All of it is bliss itself.

@97
sun  moon  external  darkness  they  destroy
external objects  pots  cloth  and so on  they  reveal
= The sun and moon destroy external darkness and reveal external objects such as pots and cloth.

@98
two  brothers  of the heart  washing away  the darkness
two  bhāgavatas  with  cause  meeting
= But the two brothers wash away the darkness of the heart and bring one to meet the two bhāgavatas.

@99
one  bhāgavata  great  the Bhāgavata scripture
the other  bhāgavata  the devotee  vessel of the rasa of devotion
= One bhāgavata is the great scripture, the *Bhāgavatam*. The other bhāgavata is the devotee, a vessel of the *rasa* of devotion.

@100
two  bhāgavatas  through  giving  the rasa of devotion
his  in the heart  by his  love  is  subdued
= Through the two bhāgavatas They give the rasa of devotion. Then the Lord, dwelling in the devotee’s heart, is subdued by his love.

@101
one  wonder  at the same time  of both  the appearance
another  wonder  of the cave of the heart  darkness  make  destruction
= One wonder is that both appear at the same time. Another wonder is that They destroy the darkness in the cave of the heart.

@102
this  moon  sun  two  supremely  merciful
of the world  by the good fortune  in Gauḍa  made  rising
= This moon and this sun are supremely merciful. By the good fortune of the world They have risen in Gauḍa.

@103
those  two  Lords'  I make  feet  worship
which  from  destruction of obstacles  fulfilment of desires
= I worship the feet of these two Lords. This destroys every obstacle and fulfils one’s cherished desires.

@104
in these  two  verses  I made  auspicious  worship
of the third  verse  the meaning  listen  all people
= In these two verses I have offered auspicious worship. Now listen, everyone, to the meaning of the third verse.

@105
abundance of what is to be said  of the book's  expansion  for fear
in detail  not  I describe  the essential meaning  I tell  in few words
= There is much to be said, but I fear the book would grow too long. So I do not describe it in detail; I tell the essential meaning in few words.

@106
measured  and  essential  and  speech  indeed  eloquence  thus
= “Speech that is brief and essential is true eloquence.”

@107
on hearing  will remove  of the heart  ignorance and other  faults
for Kṛṣṇa  deep  love  will be  will find  satisfaction
= Hearing this removes ignorance and the other faults of the heart. One will gain deep love for Kṛṣṇa and find true satisfaction.

@108-109
of Śrī Caitanya, Nityānanda and Advaita  the greatness
Their  devotees, devotion, the Name, love, rasa  the truth
separately  separately  I have written  having made  consideration
on hearing  will know  all  the essence of the truth of the Reality
= After careful consideration I have written separately of the greatness of Śrī Caitanya, Nityānanda and Advaita, and of the truth of Their devotees, of devotion, of the Holy Name, of love and of rasa. By hearing this, one will know the whole essence of the truth of the Absolute Reality.

@110
of Śrī Rūpa and Raghunātha  at the feet  whose  hope
Caitanya-caritāmṛta  tells  Kṛṣṇadāsa
= Ever hoping for the mercy of the feet of Śrī Rūpa and Raghunātha, I, Kṛṣṇadāsa, narrate *Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta*.

@notes
