Sree Krishna Chaitanya 

(VOL. I & II) 

By 

NISIKANTA SANYAL, M.A., BHAKTISHASTRI Senior Professor of History, 
Ravenshaw Collegue, Cuttack 

WITH A FOREWORD 

BY 

PARAMAHAMSA PARIBRAJAKACARYA (108) SREE SRIMAD BHAKTI 
SIDDHANTA SARASVATI GOSWAMI President of Sree Vishwa Vaishnaba 
Raj-Sabha 

PUBLISHED BY 

Tridandi Swami Bhakti Hradaya Bon 

SREE GAUDIYA MATH, ROYAPETTAH, MADRAS 

1933 

In land Rs. 15.-] 

[Foreing 21 s 



Publisher preface 


The Career and teachings of the Supreme Lord Sree Krishna-Chaitanya have 
been faithfully recorded by His associates and best beloved servants, viz., 
the former acharyas. But the version of the subject that has been presented 
by modern writers who base their narrative on the empiric study of the 
Gaudiya Vaishnav literature and their experience of the practices of the 
different hereditary sects of the Gaudiya Vaishnava Community, presents only 
the external and necessarily misleading aspect of the transcendental subject. 

His Divine Grace Paramahansa Paribrajakacharya Shree Shreemad Bhakti 
Siddhanta Saraswati Goswami stands for the strictly transcendental exposition of 
the religion of unalloyed devotion of the congregational chant of the Name 
of Krishna taught and practised by the Supreme Lord, as the Divine 
Dispensation of the present age. His Divine Grace's editions and commentaries 
of the original works of the school and numerous other publications embody 
his transcendental exposition of the universal religion in strict pursuance of 
the scriptural method followed by all the former Acharyas. 

The present volume is an attempt to convey an idea of certain features of the 
Transcendental Personality of the Supreme Lord through the medium of 
the English Language by Professor N. K. Sanyal, M.A., of the Ravenshaw 
College of Cuttack. The work has been a labour of love in the strict sense as 
Professor Sanyal performed it during the intervals of leisure from the intellectual 
preoccupations of his official duties by neglecting the claims of a naturally 
fragile health. But the book written by him deserves to be placed before the 
world for the reason that it offers the experience of a Transcendental subject as 
realised by an empiric scholar and teacher of a recognised standing. Professor 
Sanyal is, therefore, well-qualified to meet the requirements of empiric scholars 
for understanding a transcendental subject. The Publisher hopes that the 
sterling worth of the volume will be quickly appreciated by all sincere persons 
as offering a most helpful and reliable introduction to the spiritual literatures 
of this and other countries, that is essentially different in its point of view 
and estimation of spiritual values from the fashionable idealistic and 
materialistic philosophies of to-day. The work has the unique distinction of 
being recognised by Shrila Paramahansa Goswami Maharaja as containing 
an exposition of the subject on the true lines. 

The Publisher has been working as the preacher of the Gaudiya Mission in the 



Madras Presidency during several years and has been encouraged by the 
keen general interest that has been taken in the activities of the Mission by 
all sections of the cultured classes. This has led him to undertake the 
publication of this reliable version of the career of Sree Chaitanya in the English 
language which will remove a long-felt want and indicate the real relation of 
the Teachings of the Supreme Lord to all current schools of theological 
and philosophical thought. All the pecuniary proceeds of the work will be 
available for the purpose of the Mission for spreading the true knowledge of 
the principles and practices of the Religion of unalloyed devotion to all corners 
of the world. 

The publication of the volume has been helped by the generous pecuniary aid 
offered by Rao Saheb T.Rajagopalachari, B. A., Srotriemdar of 
Ernavur, Washermanpet, Madras, who has cheerfully borne the entire cost. He 
has not been content with extending his financial patronage, but has followed 
the progress of the printing of the work with watchful anxiety, regarding it as 
his most sacred duty. His child-like simplicity and genuine whole-hearted desire 
to make the tidings of the eternal religion available in a really intelligible 
and reliable form suited to the mentality of the present generation have made 
a great impression on the members of the Mission. May he be enabled to 
realise the Mercy of Sree Gaursundar by means of this sincere serving 
disposition. 

The Madras Law Journal Press has given every facility to the Publisher in 
bringing out the volume in the midst of his missionary activities which 
entail frequent and long absences from the city of Madras. In spite of the 
difficulties that were put in the way of the Press by such occurrences and by the 
fact that it was necessary to revise the matter itself after it had been composed, 
especially the Introduction and early chapters, the Proprietor of the Madras Law 
Journal Press did not grudge to give every help towards the early publication of 
the work. The finish of the work both as regards print and binding has been 
truly admirable and exceeds even the very high record of this famous 
establishment. The publisher accordingly takes this opportunity of offering his 
grateful thanks to the Proprietor and the management of the Madras Law Journal 
Press for their valuable help in bringing out this exquisitely printed volume 
within such a short time. 


Mr. C. V. Krishnaswami Iyer, B.A., Superintendent in the Secretariat of Port St. 
George, Local Self-Government, has given very valuable assistance in 



going through the proofs, in connection with the revision of the manuscript and 
in preparing the Index. The sincere thanks of the Publisher are due to this 
devoted servant of the Lord. 

SREE GAUDIYA MATH, TRIDANDI GOSVAMI, 

MADRAS, BHAKTIHRIDAYA BANA. 

Jan. 20,1933 



Preface 


The writer does not intend the book for the Indians only, nor for any particular 
sect or group of people. His appeal is to all persons, in every country, of 
both sexes, young and old including children, for accepting the unique chance of 
selfacquaintance offered by the living words of the present Most Revered 
Spiritual Head of Sree M adhva-Gaudiya Community, His Divine Grace 
Paramahansa Paribrajakacharya Sree Srimat Bhakti Siddhanta Saraswati 
Goswami Maharaj. 

No one can be more alive to the endless imperfections of the book than the 
unworthy writer. He has only one apology to offer to all his readers, viz., that he 
was compelled to write by the overpowering necessity of placing his experiences 
of the Personality and Activities of His Divine Grace and His associated 
counterparts before the world by way of his humble service, in response to the 
great and causeless mercy of Sree Guru towards a confirmed rationalist whose 
case is more or less typical of that of his brethren. It is also for the same reason 
that the work will be found to embody the method of rational enquiry being 
committed to the apparently vain attempt of measuring the unlimited by its 
admittedly incompatible resources. This performance would never have seen the 
light of the day of actual publication but for the causeless kindness of the 
Acharya who was pleased to accept this unworthy offering and thereby impart 
the real value to the gropings of irreclaimable egotism. 

My only request to the reader is that he or she may not really doubt that the 
above words are penned by an unrepentant rationalist who has been unable 
to find for himself the relief that he has the hardihood of declaring to be 
within the reach of all. In his own case this is, no doubt, the real and 
unpardonable piece of inconsistency. He is something like a privileged onlooker, 
by unsolicited permission, of a secondary aspect of the transcendental activities 
of the group of bona fide devotees of the Supreme Lord, Sree Krishna- 
Chaitanya, who have been unaccountably pleased to appear in the midst of the 
polemical generation of the present wrangling Age, for making real 
eniightenment available to all persons who are compelled seriously to seek for 
the same by the driving pressure of a denying rationalism. 

It is the submission of this slight and imperfect narrative that the needed relief is 
to be sought from the living source who is no other than the 



Transcendental Agent of Godhead Himself. It is possible for the rational 
judgment also to be satisfied, so far as such satisfaction is at all possible, if the 
Office of the Acharya is recall, even though at first necessarily tentatively, 
admitted by the establishment of personal communion, by temporary tmresen-ed 
abeyance of one's assertive judgment, with His Divine Grace, through the 
enlightening help of His associated counterparts. The narrative seeks to set forth 
some of the rational grounds in favour of the universal adoption of such course. 

As the writer had to stay at a long distance from the publisher and printers by the 
pressure of his official duties, many small and a few major inacuracies, 
for which the writer is responsible, have unfortunately escaped detection. The 
kind forgiveness of the reader is solicited for these regrettable shortcomings 
which should be avoidable in a work of this nature. 

RAVENSHAW COLLEGE, CUTTACK, SANYAL. 

NISIKANTA 

November 15,1932. 



Contents 


AUSPICATORY OBSERVANCE 

Obeisance to Sree Gum, the devotees and the Supreme Lord. Sree Krishna- 
Chaitanya did not appear primarily for delivering conditioned souls. The Real 
Purpose of His Appearance concerns Himself as He is. Godhead is willing 
and able to disclose His Own Specific Self. 

INTRODUCTORY—VOL. I 

CHAPTER I— OBJECT AND METHOD 

The object is to write the theistic account of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya identical 
with the Absolute Truth fully revealed by Himself. The Narrative has 
been received from preceptors whose vision is undisturbed by physical or 
mental obstruction. But they did not tell this thing in the present form and 
language. Sources of the present work. Thakur Bhaktivinode is the pioneer of the 
spiritual exposition of the Career of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya in the present Age. 

CHAPTER II—THE REAL NATURE OF SREE KRISHNA 

Empiric misinterpretation of the transcendental history of Krishna due to 
sectarian rancour. Outline of the Career of Krishna. 

CHAPTER III— THE HIGHEST WORSHIP OF SREE KRISHNA 

The transcendental nature of the amorous service of Krishna by the spiritual 
milkmaids of Braja is realisable by conditioned souls by gradual stages as 
the result of their progressive endeavours on the path of spiritual living. 

CHAPTER IV— COMPARATIVE STUDY OF RELIGION 

The comparative study of Religion is the study of the Distinctive Divine 
Personalities revealed by the Vedic and Puranic records. 

CHAPTER V— HISTORY OF ATHEISM 

The genesis and great variety of the atheistical schools directly and indirectly 



dominate religious opinion of the world. 

CHAPTER VI— HISTORY OF THEISM 

Progressive revelation of the highest Divine service has been the correlative of 
the growing volume and nature of atheistical opposition. 

CHAPTER VII— THE FOUNDER-ACHARYAS 

The systems of Sree Vishnuswami, Sree Nimbaditya, Sree Ramanuja and Sree 
Madhva mark the revival of Vaishnavism traceable to the pre-historic 
records. They embody the reverential worship of Vishnu. Their secondary value 
consists in being an uncompromising protest against the opinions of the 
speculative creeds. Their spiritual synthesis, although sound, is incomplete. 

CHAPTER VIII— HISTORICAL VAISHNAVISM 

Historical evidence of the prevalence of the worship of Vishnu, as 
Transcendental Godhead, is available from time immemorial. Revelation is 
an eternal spiritual process and not a mundane phenomenon occurring within 
the span of measurable time. The nature of the historical position of 
Srimad Bhagavatam. 

CHAPTER IX— HISTORY OF DIVINE DESCENDANTS (AVATARAS) 

The History of Theism is the History of the Descents of the Divinity and His 
Paraphernalia to the mundane plane. 

SREE KRISHNA-CHAITANYA— VOL. II 

CHAPTER I: —COUNTRY AND SOCIETY 

Spiritual Gauda and Nabadwip are different from the mundane country and town 
bearing those names. Identification of the site of Old Nabadwip, the City of the 
Nine Islands, and the places that are the scenes of the Activities of the Lord. Sree 
Mayapur. Old Nabadwip was a famous university town. Current religious 
practices of the period. Nature and cause of the unpopularity of the Vaishnavas. 


CHAPTER II:— FAMILY AND ELDERS 



Correspondence between the leelas of Sree Krishna and Sree Krishna-Chaitanya. 
The kindreds, associates and servitors of the Lord form the eternal Divine 
Paraphernalia Sree Jagannath Misra; Sree Nityananda; Sree Thakur Haridas; 

Sree Advait ach aryya; Sree Madhabendra Puri; Sree Iswara Puri. Implications 
of the Name 'Sree Krishna Chaitanya'. 

CHAPTER III:— BIRTH AND INFANCY 

Advaita invokes the Birth of Sree Krishna. The Appearance of the Lord hinted in 
the Scriptures. Divine Birth described. The Birth of the Lord hailed by 
His elders. Spiritual nature of the event. Advent of the Lord was greeted by 
the chant of Hari. Casting the horoscope of the divine infancy. Sachi Devi 
worships the Ganges and the goddess Sasthi. The nature of the parental affection 
of Jagannath Misra and Sachi Devi. Avatara (Descent) does not mean 
'Incarnation.' 

CHAPTER IV:— INFANCY AND BOYHOOD 

The Baby was attended by all the ladies of the neighbourhood who constantly 
sang the Name of Hari to stop His cries. Extraordinary and funny 
incidents happened daily. Naming of the Baby. Significance of the Name 
'Viswambhara' The custom of testing the disposition of a new-born baby 
embodies the underlying principle of the varnashrama. institution. The 
Activities of Infant Nimai are very much appreciated by devotees. The Baby 
catches hold of a venomous serpent and is couched on its coils. The Deeds of 
Sree Chaitanya are not manifestations of yogic powers. 

CHAPTER V:— BOYHOOD 

Child Nimai dances to the ladies chant of Hari. He begs from passers-by fruits 
and sweetmeats and gives them as reward to those ladies. His 
reckless depredations in the neighbours' houses. An extremely naughty Child. 
The Boy is detected in the Act of eating raw earth in preference to fried rice 
and sweetmeats. The Child is stolen by two thieves. The parents see the Foot¬ 
prints of Vishnu in the room of the Child. Nimai eats the food cooked by a 
pilgrim brahmana for being offered to Divine Cow-Boy and manifests to him 
His Own Divine Form of Gopala. 


CHAPTER VI:— GROWING BOY 



Beginning of study. Perforation of the ear. Tonsure. Learning the alphabet. 
Strange Boyish demands. -Nimai ate the offerings prepared for Vishnu 
on ekadashi day by Jagadis and Hiranya Pandits. The Lord is recognisable only 
by His servants. Nimai was leader of all the turbulent Brahmana urchins. 

His mischievous pranks at the bathing ghats of the Ganges. Imitations of 
these Activities by modern pseudo -Incarnations. Supernatural experiences of 
Sachi and Misra. 

CHAPTER VII:— GROWING BOY (continued) 

Nimai makes His mother promise to observe the ek adashi fast. His turbulence 
continues to increase. He is afraid only of Viswarup, His elder brother. 

Account of Viswarup. Attractiveness of Nimai. Viswarup renounces the world. 
Advaita declares to the devotees the certainty of the Coming of Krishna within a 
short time. Child Nimai shows Himself to the devotees in response to the 
assurance of Advaita. Nimai becomes more attentive to His studies. The ban on 
His studies is removed. The underlying principle of ceremonial purity 
and impurity. His Investiture with the sacrificial thread. Sree Vamana and King 
Bali. Nimai is admitted to the chatuspathi of Sree Gangadas Pandit. His relations 
with His follow-students. Nimai's timpani of the sutras of Kalapa la Vyakarnna. 
Misra beholds in a dream the sannyas of Nimai. Misra's disappearance. 

CHAPTER VIII:— EARLY YOUTH AND STUDENT-LIFE 

Love of Sachi Devi for Nimai. Wayward Conduct of Nimai towards Sachi Devi. 
Nimai procures gold for the family in an unaccountable manner. Vaishnavism is 
not sentimentalism. The career of Sree Chaitanya is to be followed, not imitated. 
The beautiful appearance of Nimai as a student. Looked up to by the pupils of 
Gangadas Pandit. Routine work at the Academy of Gangadas Pandit. Murari 
Gupta. Nimai's opposition to the mode of instruction current in the Academies of 
Nabadwip. 

CHAPTER IX:— PROFESSOR-LIFE AND MARRIAGE 

Nimai Pandit sets up His Own Academy in the Chandi-Mandap of Mukunda- 
Sanjaya. He regrets mal-interpretation of the Shastras by the empiric teachers of 
Nabadwip. Meeting with Sree Lakshmi Devi. Nature of the Marriage 
of Godhead. Banamali Ach aryya is match-maker. Marriage Ceremonies. 

Sachi Devi realizes the Divine Nature of the Bride. Misunderstandings 



regarding Marriage of Nimai Pandit. 

CHAPTER X:— PROFESSOR-LIFE (continued) 

Professor Nimai was admired by all except the Vaishnavas. Mukunda Datta. 
Popular estimate of Kirtana as mode of worship. Nimai Pandit makes 
the acquaintance of Sree Isvara Puri. Sree-Krishnaleelamrita. Sree Isvara 
Puri's loving devotion to Krishna. Nimai Pandit's disputations with Mukunda 
Datta and Gadadhar. Nimai Pandit's logical riddles. Strolls the streets of 
Nabadwip in the company of His pupils, inviting public disputation on any 
subject. Discourses to pupils on the bank of the Ganges. 

CHAPTER XI:— UNRECOGNIZED DIRECT MANIFESTATION 

Manifestation of Himself as the Divinity under the guise of nervous malady. 
Rationale of misunderstandings regarding spiritual manifestation. Is 
such manifestation inconsistent with His role of Devotee? Complete 
understanding of the subject not possible except by the mercy of the spiritual 
preceptor. Specific difficulty in the way of physicians who put their faith in 
Medical Science. Departmental view of Religion. Real nature of spiritual 
activity. 

CHAPTER XII:— IN THE STREETS OF NABADWIP 

Afternoon visits to citizens. In a weaver's home. In the milk-men's quarter. In the 
homes of a dealer of perfumes, a garland-maker, a betel-seller, a dealer 
in conches. In the home of a diviner who calculates His former births. 

The diviner's realisation. The Lord's conversation with Sridhar. Object of 
these visits. Sridhar's philosophy. Is begging the legitimate occupation of 
Brahmanas? Did Sree Gaursundar approve the trade of the betel-seller ? The 
eternally free state of the soul. Sachi hears the strains of the Divine Flute and has 
the vision of the never-ending Divine Manifestations. Nature of the service of 
Sree Sachi Devi. Arrogance of Sree Gaursundar. Sree Gaursundar did not engage 
in amorous pastimes with hypothetical mistresses. Krishna's conduct not to 
be imitated by jivas. Mercy of Sree Gaursundar. Sribas Pandit 
discourages arrogance of Sree Gaursundar. Reverential versus confidential 
service. 


CHAPTER XIII:— THE IDEAL HOUSEHOLDER 



Hospitality to chance-guests. Charity and open-handed hospitality to chance- 
guests the principal duties of every householder. The underlying principle of 
such injunction. Provision for the poor. Relation of house holder to 
Sannyasin. The specific Nature of the Charity of Sree Gaursundar. Duties of 
Vaishnava Householder. Lakshhmi Devi cooks the family meals. Her household 
duties described. Position of wife in the household of her husband. Personal 
service of Godhead. Performance of domestic duties to please the Supreme Lord. 
Menial work and personal subordination. Desire for sensuous enjoyment root- 
cause of all mundane trouble. Relationship of Sree Lakshmi Devi to Sree 
Gaurasundar grossly misunderstood by philanthropists. Sojourn of the Lord to 
East Bengal. Sree Gaursundar teaches the Brahmanas of East Bengal. Effect of 
His visit. Pretenders to saviourship condemned by Thakur Vrindavandas. 

Ethical conduct obligatory on all. Moral life not the goal of human 
activities. Disappearance of Sree Lakshmi Devi. Personality of Sree Lakshmi 
Devi. 

CHAPTER XIV:— TAPAN MISRA; RETURN FROM EAST BENGAL 

Nimai Pandit accepts presents from His pupils. Trade in religious teaching 
forbidden. Tapan Misra inquires about the real nature of the object and 
method of spiritual practices. Tapan Misra's dream. The Lord divulges to Tapan 
Misra the Divine Dispensation of the Kali Age. The Mahamantra. Observations 
on the creed. Misunderstandings. The simplest possible Creed. Is faith in 
Creed rational? Mahamantra not a magical formula. Nature of spiritual 
enlightenment. Return of Nimai Pandit from East Bengal. He learns about the 
Disappearance of Sree Lakshmi Devi. Nimai Pandit consoles His mother. 
Spiritual conduct and worldly needs. Grief of Sree Gaursundar. 

CHAPTER XV:— MARRIAGE WITH SREE VISHNUPRIYA DEVI 

The making of tilaka mark on the forehead compulsory for His students. 
Distinction between tripundra and urdhapundra. Is tilaka mark a 
"symbol"? Nimai Pandit shuns the society of woman. This is ignored by the 
pseudo-sect of Gaur-Nagaris. Condemnation of sexuality by the Scriptures. 
Spiritual amour and carnality. The charge that Sree Chaitanya was of unsound 
mind. Marriage of the Lord for a second time. The sacrament of marriage. The 
Conduct of Sree Chaitanya identical with, yet distinct from, the Leela of Sree 
Krishna. Sree Chaitanya personates the function of Sree Radhika Kasinath 
Pandit is matchmaker. The adhibas ceremony. 



CHAPTER XVI:— MARRIAGE WITH SHREE VISHNUPRIYA 
DEVI (continued) 

The Marriage Ceremonies. Buddhimanta Kh an. Significance of the Lord's 
Marriage. The Personality of Sree Vishnupriya Devi. Sree, Bhu, and Neela. 

The interdependant nature of the functions of the distinctive powers of the 
Lord. Significance of the subsequent renunciation of the world by the Lord. 

CHAPTER XVII:— TRIUMPHS OF LEARNING 

New Method of Teaching. Nature of His erudition distinct from defective 
intellectualism. Pandits of Nabadwipfailed to learn the Truth. 

Personal meditation of theTeacher. Nimai Pandit exposes the sophistries of the 
Pandits of Nabadwip. Controversy with Keshab Bhatta Conqueror of all 
quarters’ (digvijayi). Deliverance of Keshab Bhatta. Popular appreciation of 
the scholarship of the Lord. 

CHAPTER XVIII:— SIGNIFICANCE OF SCHOLASTIC TRIUMPHS 

The text of the shloka of Keshab Bhatta impeached by Sree Chaitanya. The 
goddess of worldly learning always misleads her votaries. Sree Jiva 
Goswami not an empiric controversialist. Plight of Keshab Bhatta. Real remedy 
of real miseries. Cause and nature of the deliverance of Keshab Bhatta. 

Empiric knowledge does not give possession of power. Empiric knowledge 
superfluous on attainment of spiritual enlightenment. It is possible to know the 
Truth. Nontranscendental knowledge subordinate to transcendental. The want to 
know identical with the want to serve the Absolute. How inclination to serve 
the Truth is produced. The shock of spiritual awakening. Sight of the 
Lord. Function of empiric learning. Submission to the Divine Person. 

Personality and Truth. Transcendental personality of the devotee. Keshab Bhatta 
not to be confounded with Keshab Kashmiri. 'Krama-deepika'. The 
distinctive characteristic of the servants of Sree Gaursundar. Why the 
achievements of this world pass away. Abuse of empiric knowledge aggravates 
aversion to Truth. Arrogance of the devotee of the Lord the perfection of 
humility. 

CHAPTER XIX:— THAKUR HARIDAS BEFORE HIS MEETING WITH 
SREE GAURSUNDAR 

Thakur Haridas is the authorized divine agent for the promulgation of the chant 



of the Holy Name, the new dispensation of the age. Born in a Muhammadan 
family. Conversion of the harlot. Process of reclamation of sinners by the chant 
of the Name explained. It is not blind faith. Sensuousness obstructs faith. 
Conventional and real morality, 'reformers' often misunderstand the Scriptures. 
The teaching of the Shastras is the function of Br ahmanas. Novelty of the new 
worship resented by Hindus. Empiricism cannot consistently object to the chant 
of the Name. The only function of the soul. Thakur Haridas is real Br ahman. 
Raghun ath Das Goswami, then a boy, meets Thakur Haridas and receives his 
mercy. Thakur Haridas exposition of the chant of the Name opposed by Gopal 
Chakravarty as contravening the principles of monistic interpretation of the Ved 
anta. Devotion, work and knowledge. Pessimism and optimism versus 
Absolutism. Truth is not impersonal which is the limiting point of all rational 
discussion. Submission to non-God. The Transcendental Sound. Grossness of the 
ideal of Liberationism. Enjovment versus love. Children benefit by association 
with S adhus. 

CHAPTER XX:— THAKUR HARIDAS BEFORE HIS MEETING WITH 
SREE GAURSUNDAR (continued 

Thakur Haridas shifts to Fuli and meets Advaita Acharya. Chanting of the Name 
identical with the amorous loving devotion of Braja. The Ten offences against 
the Name. Thakur Haridas' life at Fulia is altogether different from the practices 
of prakrita sahajiyas (philanthrophists). Does Thakur Haridas' creed provide for 
the needs of our worldly life, or should it be admired from a distance like 
Monism ? The real meaning of the Life of Sree Chaitanva can be realised by 
following the teaching of Thakur Haridas. Thakur Haridas same as Brahma. 
Chanting of the Name suits modern conditions. Realisation is progressive. How 
to avoid the clutches of the pseudo-sadhu. The Kazi sets the Moslem Governor 
against Thakur Haridas. Thakur Haridas' advice to the prisoners. Does the 
chanter of the Name require the so-called 'necessaries' of life? Thakur Haridas 
ordered by the Governor to be beaten to death. The form of the dialogue, used in 
transcendental narratives, should not be misunderstood. Principle of religious 
toleration liable to be misunderstood. Why the persecution of Thakur Haridas 
cannot be defended. Immunity of Thakur Haridas from bodily pain and injury. 

CHAPTER XXI:— THAKUR HARIDAS (continued) 

Exhibition of power by Thakur Haridas impresses his persecutors and secures 
him against further molestation. Thakur Haridas dances at the show of the snake- 



charmer. The cudgelling of the hypocrite Brahmana by the snake charmer. 
Spiritual perturbation. The standing grievance of atheists. A Brahmana of 
Harinadi opposes the chanting of the Name with a loud voice. Name and mantra. 

CHAPTER XXII:— PILGRIMAGE TO GAYA AND INITIATION 

Brahmana as sole custodian of the education of the people. The life, enjoined by 
the Scriptures on a Brahmana, is the probationary stage of 
spiritual enlightenment. The Lord sets out on pilgrimage to Gaya ostensibly for 
the purpose of performing the funeral rites of His departed father. The Lord 
visits Sree Madhusudana at Mandara. He drinks the feet-wash of Brahmana. The 
Lord is the servant of His servant. At Poonapoona. The sight of the Foot-prints 
of Sree Gadadhara produces in the Lord all the perturbations of loving 
devotion and is the turning point of His career. The sight of Hari's Feet produces 
the serving disposition irrespective of fitness. The ethical problem. Ethical 
necessity of Divine Grace. The Real Presence of the Feet of Sree Gadadhara at 
Gaya as Archa. The Lord meets Sree Isvara Puri in the Temple of the Holy Feet 
of Gadadhara. Meeting with Sree Guru. The Lord obtains the favour of 
initiation (diksh a) from Sree Isvara Puri. The nature of unconditional surrender 
to the Guru. 

CHAPTER XXIII:— HIS INITIATION (continued) 

The spiritual principle underlying ritualistic worship. Mentalist objections to 
ritual. Quest for the substantive spiritual function rendered possible by the grace 
of the bona fide teacher of the Truth. Objectionable form of association with 
evil. Funeral rituals. Misunderstandings regarding the ritual of diksha Readiness 
to appreciate the transcendental point of view in India, a valuable asset for 
humanity. The relation of the Guru to his disciple. Mantra admits to the spiritual 
communion which is necessary for its fruition. Connection of the new 
dispensation with the older communions. Speedy effects of the Mantra on Nimai 
Pandit. Nimai Pandit's changed conduct. Miracles and transcendental events. 
Human form of the Divinity. 

CHAPTER XXIV:— HIS INITIATION AND AFTER 

Method of service analogous to that of the mood of separation, alone available 
on the material plane. Mood of separation different from asceticism. Infinity 
of functions towards the Absolute. Cause of the sorrowful mood of Nimai 



Pandit. His Search for Krishna as sann asin, not to be mistaken for salvationism. 
Sight of Krishna the fulfillment of the probationary stage and beginning of the 
real search. Archana and symbolical worship. Place of mantra in Archana. 
Archana sanctioned by Godhead is fulfilled by the vision of the Divinity as He 
is. Quasispiritual activities involve neither attachment nor aversion to mundane 
entities but are full of spiritual interest. Archana and bhajana. Conduct prompted 
by the higher form of worship cannot be understood by those who are not 
spiritually advanced. The Religion of the Chant of the Name is supremely simple 
and profound. The personality of a sadhu. Every one is naturally sincere. 
Insincerity a suicidal folly. The Absolute does not deceive anybody. Physical 
cases obstruct spiritual living. Persistence of spiritual memory possible by the 
grace of the sadhu. Service of the sadhu possible only on the transcendental 
plane. Perfect openness of mind is necessary for not grossly misunderstanding 
the activity of Sree Chaitanya after His initiation, which is the subject of the next 
volume. 



Foreword 


Men of culture are often found to devote themselves in acquiring knowledge of 
various subjects which could prove efficacious to them in their needs; so we may 
not confuse to accept all readers in the same line of thought. The 
best scrutinizers of knowledge in their cultural extension should possess all 
skill and dexterity to get their most covetable end having had a care for Eternity 
and uninterrupted Blissful unalloyed Knowledge. This incarnate of the acme 
of knowledge-seekers will be the best reader of this book when they can have 
the privilege of comparing the merits of different views of pure theists. 

Mental speculationists have diverse objects of investigation and their diversity 
of seeking Knowledge would simply disturb the peaceful mentality having 
been tempted by the duping features of external manifestations, quite suitable 
and dove-tailing the present purposes of enjoyment by their imperfect senses. 

The writer has got the prime object of furnishing a comparative study in which 
the position of a reader has the highest place. This is his only ambition, 
of healing the depraved mentality of the so-called culturists of True 
Knowledge. But the readers have different motives of utilizing the product of 
their enterprise of perusing the book. One class of readers are found to criticise 
the merits and demerits of the writer in order to establish their superiority, with 
a view to puff up their vanity. Another class is observed to muse over the 
subject by spending their time for the gratification of their senses. The third 
section of readers mean to profit by reading the book in order to regulate their 
life for a better purpose. The under-estimation of a desirable element for some 
utilisation through temporal gratification of senses, would not equipoise the third 
position of the reader who will surely mark the distinctive situation by 
comparing other things and agree with the author in spending his valuable time 
for true amelioration. 

The body of the book will appear before readers as a historical account of the 
Journey of life of a Hero. But the Hero is not an ordinary mundane hero for 
a hallucinative ambition with a spiritual tinge. The account will no doubt 
show that the targetted Object of the manifestive spiritual world is Eternal 
and identical with the Hero of the speaker. Hasty conclusions will be pouring 
forth to oppose this by welcoming anthropomorphic and apotheotic thoughts. 

The delineations will prove that the Object pointed to is beyond the 
comprehension of crippled senses. And the Absolute Eternity made up of Pure 



Knowledge and Incessant Bliss is never to be had within the compass of our 
senses. All objects of the phenomena which are comprehended by senses have 
temporal situation and deformed entity void of different ‘qualities’ that are 
always submissive to senses. 

Sree Krishna-Chaitanya’s inculcations of the Personality of Godhead cannot be 
restricted to or accused as Idolatry. Idols are constructed of mundane 
materials and are subject to the inspection of senses. The Eternal Absolute does 
not exactly submit to these senses as He does not put Himself as a shareholder 
of phenomenal things. Whichever comes under senses has equal value with one 
of Nature’s products and forms to be a subject of the jurisdiction of senses. 

The Eternal Absolute is inconceivable by limited senses. The partially eclipsed 
views of the Absolute are shaky, non-absolute, liable to transformation and under 
the clutch of the span of Time. The physical limitations are all accommodated 
in Space, Time and particular entities. The naming of the Transcendental 
Absolute through the lips of a mundane agent will surely seek after a size, a 
colour, etc., and must undergo the ocular examination. The Transcendental 
Absolute should in no case submit to our dermal perceptions, neither to our nasal 
or lingual activities as well. 

The Transcendental Sound has got a distinctive denomination from mundane 
sounds which often tend to submit to the test of other senses. As 
the Transcendental Sound has not been originated in mundane phenomena, He 
will not be diffident in showing His true phase whose manifestive realisations 
are identical with the Name Himself. In that case the essence of such Sound 
would not permit the different entities of the same Object; as we find in 
phenomenal objects tracings of numerical base instead of the integral unit. The 
differential values are integrated in the Transcendence. So there is indication of 
One Object by the dinning of the ethereal vibrations in different positions. These 
sounds converge in One Point Who is known as the Absolute. This Absolute is 
on the Eternal plane of All-Knowledge and Incessant Bliss and can have 
manifestive Absolute phases with Him. If the various sounds are put into this 
chaotic plane, there is no reconciliation of a synthetic method. This 
unharmonising tendency will surely bring a contending and unpleasant 
atmosphere which we experience everyday. 

The uneclipsed phase of the Integral Sound will not in any case bring rupture, 
but harmonise the contending phase due to the intervention of foreign intrusion. 
The demarcating lines of comprehending the same thing through the chambers 



of senses would lead to mundane enjoyment; whereas the ignorance of enjoying 
things through limited scope would put the enjoyer within the barriers. When the 
Observer is One, He sees everything and exercises all His Senses for His Own 
gratification. But the servitors who are fractional entities cannot have any 
harmonious situation unless all of them have got one aim of being predominated 
over by the Absolute. The question of relativity does not become a barrier, as we 
notice such deformities in these phenomena which are subject to Individuality, 
Space and Time. This situation, solving the difficulties of mundane relativity and 
Absolute, has been finally settled by the Transcendental unspotted manifestive 
phase, instead of wrongly inculcating a hallucinative theory of Absolute by 
negativing the conception of diversities. 

The numerical situations of the different entities here have got a relative 
representation which is certainly condemnable for its undesirability. The glaring 
desirable features of relativity as delineated in the Transcendence should not be 
anthropomorphised by our poverty-stricken knowledge and narrow views of 
phenomenal disorders. In the Absolute Region we find descriptions of mutual 
Manifestive phases, the Master there being One with millions of servitors of four 
different classes. We further notice the Absolute as the Eternally Blissful Son of 
the Entity of Unalloyed Knowledge. The Absolute Friend is the Cynosure of all 
friendly eyes, as the Single Object of friendship. 

He is the Consort of depending consorts and is the Predominating Singular 
Object of unalloyed love of predominated objects. Whereas, in the 
mundane plane we find many predominating agents together with 
predominated sentients. People need not puzzle themselves with the ascription of 
a motherly idea in the Supreme Absolute, as the seeming features of parents here 
have got a dignified position which is nothing but a perverted conception of the 
Real manifestive Absolute. Moreover we find that the parents get the 
opportunity of serving their only coveted child from His very Birth in different 
capacities. So the Eternal position of the Master is retained intact from the very 
Advent of the Child. If we are to accept services from the Lord, Whom we have 
to render our service, we are simply misled. The Divine Absolute should not be 
classed as our servitor, as our eternal position is to render our all-time and 
whole-hearted services to Him alone. A deviation from this will be tampering the 
very principle of transcendental devotion. The author has wisely delineated 
these crucial points in the Instructive Life of the Supreme Lord. 


The enjoying temperament of this temporal world will find a good jerk in the 



line of thought of approaching the Transcendence. Sree Krishna-Chaitanya, 
the greatest world-teacher, has exhibited to his taught the transcendental 
loving principle of unalloyed souls towards the Absoute All-love where 
phenomenal dirts could not possibly contaminate the pleasant situation of 
Manifestive Relativity. The unalloyed devotional exhibition in the Pastimes of 
Sree Krishna-Chaitanya and His followings are -the best and greatest Boon that 
could be had in the quest of the Absolute. Readers might have noticed one thing 
in the vital principle of Transcendence of the Desertion of the enjoying mood 
and the affinity for temporal deformed objects. This abnegation at the very outset 
will create a puzzling sensation among the youngsters who have embarked on 
the journey of life to aim after sensuous enjoyment in temporal phenomena. 

So they may hastily discard the principle of showing diffidence for their 
much coveted dream of enjoyment in this world. Sree Krishna-Chaitanya has 
defined the proper use of the Relief that is offered by the non-meddling with 
mundane affairs in an enjoying mood. He has not asked anybody to adopt the 
indolent processes of non-co-operating with the phenomenal objects. He has 
rather instructed to practice accepting mundane things when we can trace 
the connections of the essence of such things with Sree Krishna, the 
Manifested Fountain-head of the Absolute. His disclosure has set right the topsy¬ 
turvy, hodge-podge situation of this apparently chaotic world. He has 
further cautioned the renouncers not to summarily reject the association of 
relative things for fear of their proving to be detrimental to alienating the 
peaceful soul from the mundane troubles by associating themselves with the 
purposes of the manifested Absolute. 

The busy people of this world have decided that the gratification of senses 
should be the essential aim of all our enterprises here as well as in the 
next world. So they have deemed it fit to adopt the principle of an ethical 
religion supplying their wants and to fulfill whatever we are in need of. These 
triple results are the covetable solutions of the enjoying calibre of sentient 
entities. This sort of mentality is found in the enjoyers. But there is an opposite 
section who believes that unless such desiring agencies are stopped, no eternal 
good can be expected. So they have formulated a different goal for their 
purpose. These men consider that salvation is required from phenomena by 
practising a non-co-operative mood from all and even the necessaries of life, 
which tantamount to suicidal commission. By following the high-sounding 
words of annihilation in the Absolute by dismissing the three respective 
positions of observer, observation and observed, they covet to be finally rescued 
from phenomenal troubles. 



The Supreme Lord Sree Krishna-Chaitanya has neither encouraged the enjoying 
elevationists nor the renouncing Salvationists. He has prescribed the pure theistic 
thought of spiritual devotion to the Personality of All-love by the loving function 
of the unalloyed souls instead of plunging into the ocean of miseries which offer 
extreme troubles to elevationists and to persons who, having bitter worldly 
experience, desire to terminate their animation by the process of annihilation. 

The Supreme Lord has Thereby settled the question of transmigration. The 
Semites have, however, adopted a principle, by rejecting the theory of 
metempsychosis, to dispense with the long extending life of a migratory 
element. The love of the Absolute can never be attained by men who seek after 
their aggrandisement or after their liberation. Persons who entertain the view of 
their actual freedom from such selfish propensities, can have the privilege of 
knowing what Prema is—which has no bartering system of ‘give and take 5 
policy. The unalloyed souls are meant to love the All love with 
the identification of their eternal loving element. The loving souls are not at 
all dissatisfied whether the Supreme Lover is inclined to grant their prayer, on 
the very understanding that their loving connection is inseparable. They at 
the same time prove themselves to be quite content as their only lover has 
deemed it fit to discard them and thereby enjoy by the services offered by them. 
The consideration of exchange has confined the elevationists and Salvationists 
to their respective gains; whereas, no such gain is aimed at by devotees who 
have thoroughly comprehended their positions of non-traders. This unalloyed 
love can never be expected in any agents who have got ulterior motives of 
satisfying their pleasing and enjoying demeanor. Unalloyed service can only be 
found in Prema which has a special characteristic of pure sacrifice without 
any remuneration in return. No enjoying mood can have any place in 
that unalloyed function. 

The transcendental love should never be compared with the lustful mundane 
position of an enjoyer. Prema reaches its acme in consorthood and the 
lower stages in filial love, friendship, services and in neutrality. So this 
Amorous transcendental love has no comparison with other loving affinities. 

The cardinal point of this unique progression of love has got a steady infinite 
dimension of activity which can have no equal in our experience. The 
Absolute Prema is never to be confused with the shaky position of nuptial love 
of mundane mortal people which tends to have reciprocal interest. But as it has 
no bearing with deformed relativities, no claim can be asserted to combat with 
the challengers through arguments. 



The historical account connected with the Pastimes of the Absolute need not be 
mixed with the mundane activities of transformable entities. But the 
elaboration of transcendental accounts must not be discouraged owing to the 
bitter experiences we have of our temporal life here. The incidental mentions 
of history bear a reference of earthly things liable to be perished in time. 

The essence of history need not be kept at arm’s length in consideration of 
worldly associations which necessitate the existence of components of matter 
or motion. 

Descriptive accounts of history help us in considering the relation between the 
already acquired knowledge and the welcoming of new thoughts. But in 
the present case, where we are to deal with a case beyond Nature’s phenomena, 
we should be cautious not to confuse with human frailties and mixing up 
with temporal defective impressions of mundane relatives. Historicity of things 
need not be summarily rejected if it renders help to comprehend the direction 
and nature of the transcendental views. So every branch of knowledge has 
efficacy to offer us first aid towards our advancement in the Region beyond 
Nature. 

The transcendental sensuous Activities of the Absolute have got transcendental 
reference and avoid submitting to human senses which are but frail 
and inadequate. The descriptions of the Transcendental Pastimes of the 
Absolute need not be confused with metaphorical analogy, strictly confined to 
our present situation, of acquiring knowledge. Allegories are figments and 
are treated as innovations of older thoughts in a systematic way in order to place 
a certain view of things. If they are meant for the purpose of the 
Transcendent and not for our sensuous gratification, we can accept them for the 
safety of our transcendental health instead of eliminating even the purpose. 

Mental speculations may drag us to some secular purpose which we should 
avoid for the sake of studying the Absolute Transcendent Who has 
no contending character to expel the variegated similar manifestations as we 
often perceive through our senses. So the author has described the Deeds which 
bear a resemblance to that of history and allegory provided they are not 
improperly carried to mundane restrictive merits. 

History, fiction or poems have worldly values; but when they help us towards the 
topics of Transcendence we need not have an anthropomorphic disposition. If we 
bring down the Eternal Pastimes the Character of the Transcendence 



is proselytised more or less to our sensuous purpose—a solemn offense which 
we should not do. 

Our intellectual advancement has proved the three different ways of attaining to 
our different goals: (1) one track is known as fruitive track to propitiate deities to 
meet and fulfill our demands by physical and mental entities. The dearth of 
desired objects keeps us at a lower level and we want an amelioration and 
elevation from the lowest level to the highest summit. In that case we consider 
ourselves to be actors or perpetrators of our intended actions. When we are 
actuated by such exciting mood we entertain a definite result which can serve 
our purpose best. This activity of our physical and mental entities is strictly 
confined in temporal and inadequate phases. (2) The quest of a different track is 
insistently urged on our intellectual function when we want to desert the 
fructifying demeanour of the mind. Desertion from the active life shows us a 
different track of seeking the Absolute Intelligence by the process 
of intellectualism. We want to sever our pleasure-seeking aptitude in 
our passionate desires to destroy all sorts of selfishness accrued in 
Nature’s temporary association. Renunciation from all temporal activities in this 
plane of deformities offers us a mentality of stupefaction which may be termed 
as abnegation. In the artificial process of dissociating ourselves from 
the temporarily meddlings with foreign things which are set apart from our 
entity, the actor merges himself in the Object pursued, dismissing his active 
functions. This conglomeration is effected by the synthetic process of grouping 
together limited things into an accumulative effect; but the accumulation 
of diametrically opposite elements would never alone yield an opposite 
element, save in the analogy of enhanced angularities as in the case of two right 
angles. The neutral position of unalloyed intellectualism would lead us to the 
result of the extended idea of limitation. Speculative method of synthetical 
activities terminates in undifferenced situation of Knower, knowledge and the 
object of knowledge. 

(3) But the advancement would prove that the track of transcendental devotion 
towards the Absolute is quite free from the summation of the fruitive 
activities as well as the desertion from having a selfish desire to get a lion’s 
share as a cosharer. The tracks of elevation and salvation have very little to do in 
leading to the track of Devotion, as the devotional process has no object of 
encouraging the f fruitive activities in extricating out the Variegated 
Transcendental Eternal situation. The very process of salvation indicates in time 
the two different predicaments of the situation which is a bar to the purpose of 



Eternity. The Devotional process is quite independent of the two systems of 
fruitseekers or enjoyers and abnegators or avoiders of self-destructive 
enjoyment. Readers will no doubt secure the true rationalistic view from the 
writings of this author. 

Pure devotional aptitude need not wait for any help from the two other tracks but 
is quite independent of them. Devotion can only be carried out when 
the unalloyed position of the soul is determined. Such function should have 
no component of two other foreign garments which have more or less 
enshrouded the unalloyed soul in the two planes of association and dissociation 
with temporal things. The devotional functions of the unalloyed soul need not 
be observed by placing patches of clouds which are adaptable for the 
limited plane, eclipsing the true aspects of the true eternal plane of devotion. 

The Absolute Knowledge should not bear any reference of deviation and 
whenever there is the different views we find that the different aspects deprive us 
of the exact entity of the thing by our polytheistic views of the one thing. 

The Absolute Truth is ever ready to welcome the different approaches of the 
atomic parts of the Unalloyed Absolute. But when those atomic parts are 
mixed up with foreign views they need not be dove-tailed with the Absolute 
like unalloyed entities associated with the Unalloyed Absolute. The 
distorted demeanour of the mind cannot approach the Unalloyed Absolute by the 
easygoing mandate of receiving all sorts of services that may be rendered to 
the One; but that One need not have a disfigured entity which is far off His 
original Beautiful and Sublime Existence. If the Object of our approaching 
be considered to be contaminated with evil associations inviting our 
nefarious aptitude of enjoyment, we cannot expect to include ourselves to submit 
to His Wishes. 

First of all, the Object need not be tampered in any way by our whimsical mood 
and our determination of self need not accompany any 
anthropomorphic deformities which have no bearing in Him. The different 
relations we experience in society should be carefully watched in the case of 
associating ourselves with the Eternal Absolute. We need not carry the defects 
and unpleasant pains along with us when we trace out our eternal relations 
with Him. The Absolute Knowledge need not undergo the variegated form of 
the enjoyable articles, sentient and insentient we meet here. But we are to 
approach Him with our serving mood for His Eternal Enjoyment. We must not 



be thinking of eliminating all foreign attributions in us unless we mean to 
please Him by considering ourselves to be exactly suiting to His purpose which 
may not be proving to create His annoyance as we experience on this painful 
plane here. A close reading of the accounts of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya will 
certainly lead us to the Manifestation of the Absolute in proper order. 

If we have a sincere heart to associate ourselves with the Absolute, we must not 
be considering Him to be our Servitor but we should pose ourselves in 
the position of a servitor to suit one of His relationships. Our entities will then 
be different ingredients of the service-holders of the Absolute. But as we are in 
the habit of securing enjoyments as lords, we have got a quite 
different determination of self as to lord it over other existences besides our own. 
In order to set right this awkward taste, we should approach a true serving 
friend who can regulate our evil propensities which are the bars of the true 
functions of the unalloyed soul. We cannot make profit by the association of the 
people who are very busy to culture their wrong habits as enjoyers of this 
world instead of eliminating the undesirable inculcations of associating with 
temporal things. The company of non-devotees and the counsels of apathetic 
disposition towards the Absolute should by all means be avoided. If we fail to 
get rid of such intoxicants, we are liable to miss the devotional functions of the 
unalloyed soul, without making any progress towards the march for our eternal 
welfare. 

The question of occupation has been decided by the Personality of the Supreme 
Lord in the all-time engagement of all individual souls proper for the 
Absolute. The occupation of the mind is found to meddle with temporal objects 
of phenomena; whereas the parts of the body have no other suitable position to 
fit themselves for limited and temporal purposes. All acts should tend to 
acquire virtue and happiness. All virtues and happinesses should lead to 
sacrifice instead of captivating the soul for mundane purposes only. All 
such dissociating mood with worldly sensuous attainment tends to the 
occupation of the Absolute and this occupation should be no other function but 
go to show the interest of the Absolute. The very conception of the external 
structure and the internal existence, which is also considered as a subtle garment, 
must not forfeit the interest of the Principal who is known to own these 
two environments. The interest of the Principal, ‘soul’, should have no 
ephemeral acquisition like the consumption of the mind and the body. Altruism 
may prove to suffice for the higher aims of soul; but such deluding features 
should not bar the progress of the soul in any way. The body and the mind are 



shifting agents which, though at present incorporated with the soul, tend to 
the temporary aggrandisement of the incorporated changeable parts. So 
attention should be drawn to the interest of the soul proper whose functions 
should not at all be crippled by the seeming necessaries of the mind and the body 
revolting against the Eternal Blissful Knowledge, viz., the Absolute. 

Our all-time occupation need not be confined to the highest reference of mental 
culture in pure and simple altruism, where the reference of the Absolute 
along with the reference of our behaviour towards the lower creation is 
neglected. 

The inclusion of an indirect service to an Impersonal God or our charitable 
disposition to some extent towards lower animals by tutored 
sympathising mentality, is optional and not compulsory. 

The Great Absolute should predominate over the crippled forms of infinitesimal 
absolutes who may appear at the outset as illustrations of nonabsolute. If the 
synthetic process of all isolated entities does not go to One Undeviated Object of 
the Absolute, it would prove to be a chaotic emporium of unassimilating 
differences; so our mentalities require rectification to arrange their order in a 
particular line. One of our friendly co-sharers should come forward to explain 
before us the nature of the course that should be adopted for our methodic 
comprehension of the irregularities in one line. This unparalleled mercy of the 
One Friend and His associates is to regulate the disorderly conduct of the body 
and the mind. The rhetorical principle of the predominating and predominated 
functions in their bases of activities could give us the result of one of the four 
ingredients that follow when we are relieved of the worldly deformed 
conceptions in the pure spontaneity of a defined nature of eternal relationship 
that exists between the Absolute and the significatory aspects of the internal 
parts of the Absolute. 

Whenever the specification of the Predominator is prominent, we necessarily 
find the reciprocal predominated aspects, which may prove to be more than One, 
as distinguished from the case of the Predominator. The Predominating Agent 
has a singular significance over the multifarious predominated. This portion of 
the analysis of the Transcendental Integer has become the most conspicuous 
explanation offered to mankind by any of the guiding leaders to bring us towards 
the Transcendence. Earnest readers will no doubt find this unique explanation 
offered by the writer in the line of instructions received by him from the 



Transcendental Hero, Whose Career and accounts have been portrayed in this 
book. 

The peculiar feature noticed in men apart from the lower creation is this that the 
former can exchange thoughts and have the superiority of utilising 
their experience through the recollections from history and acquired branches 
of knowledge. They can show their felicitous mood in listening to Scriptures 
also. So a comparative student can easily demarcate the line of the best and full 
apart from transitory experiences of this world. The question of Eternity, 

Full Knowledge and Bliss cannot be dealt by other agencies of life-save man; so 
man need not neglect the position of the Absolute in the Ever-existence, in 
Full Knowledge void of all sorts of ignorance and ills that flesh is heir to, 
and Beatific Constancy of the Fountain-head. The solution of human life 
should tend towards the approach of the Absolute Who is always courting us to 
offer His help towards the fulfillment of the inadequate specialty we have in us. 
And in order to gain an approach we should require the guidance of an 
individual in whom we can place our reliance, instead of being credulous with 
the smugglers of this world. 

The Supreme Ford has left in this world a band of His followers who are always 
helpful to mankind instead of deluding the intellectuals to turn 
themselves idealists and evil-doers with an apparent phase of seekers of their 
welfare. The author will no doubt be gratified if any of the readers can see his 
way to scrutinise the Subject of the Transcendence in Whom we are all 
vitally interested by sparing his valuable time to go through this book. 

Before concluding this Foreword, I would like to introduce to the respected 
readers the aspiring attitude of enlightening his readers on the 
Transcendental Entity of Sree Krishna as well as His Phase of Instructor in Sree 
Krishna-Chaitanya in the following points, with references to the context. 

(N.B .—All the references are to chapter and verse of the .tenth skandha of 
Srimad Bhagavatam). 

Krishna is possessed of an unlimited intellect (84/22). 

Krishna is inaccessible to sensuous knowledge (16/46). 

Krishna is Ford of the infinity of worlds (69/17). 



Krishna wields the power of creating the unlimited (87/28). 

Krishna carries the impress of limitless power (87/14). 

Krishna is possessed of inconceivable potency (10/29). 

Krishna is unborn (59/28, 74/21). 

Krishna solves all heterogeneous views (74/24). 

Krishna is vanquished by exclusive devotion (14/3). 

Krishna is Inner Guide (1/7). 

Krishna is the Withholder of the energy of the wicked (60/19) -Krishna is the 
Giver of salvation to jivas that are free from vanity (86/48). Krishna ordains the 
worldly course of conceited jivas (86/48). 

Krishna is Primal God (Deva) (40/1). 

Krishna is Primal Person (Purusha) (63/38). 

Krishna is overwhelming flood of bliss (83/4). 

Krishna possesses fulfilled desire (47/46). 

Krishna is self-delighted (60/20). 

Krishna is the opponent of the sensuous (60/35). 

Krishna is sung by the best of hymns (86/23). 

Krishna is the dispeller of the night of pseudo-religion (14/40). 

Krishna is devoid of increase and decrease (48/26). 

Krishna is efficient and material cause (10/29). 

Krishna is the only Truth (14/23 ). 

Krishna is Awarder of the fruit of work (49/29). 



Krishna is not subject to the consequences of work (84/17). 

Krishna is the Seer of cause and effect (38/12). 

Krishna is the Person who is time (1/7). 

Krishna is Time s Own Self (70/26). 

Krishna is even the Time of time (56/27). 

Krishna is Present in the heart of every animate entity, like fire inside wood 
(46/36). 

Krishna is Grateful (48/26). 

Krishna is the Augmentor (like the Full Moon) of the ocean of earth, gods, 
twice-born and animals (14/40). 

Krishna is the Tormentor of cannibalistic persons (14/40). 

Krishna is the Destroyer of the pride of the arrogant (60/19). 

Krishna is the Root-Cause of the origin, etc., of the world (14/23). 

Krishna is the Cause of the world (40/1). 

Krishna is the Creator of the world (70/38). 

Krishna appears as if possessed of a body like that of mundane entities, for the 
good of the world (14/55). 

Krishna is the Guru (centre of gravity) of the world (80/44). 

Krishna is the Refuge (ashraya) of jivas (individual souls) who are ,afraid of 
birth and death (49/12). 

Krishna is devoid of birth (46/38). 

Krishna is equally the Internal Guide, Cause and Director of jivas (87/30). 
Krishna is the Destroyer of the miseries of persons who employ themselves 
in meditating upon Him (58/10). 



Krishna is of the fourth dimension and self-manifest (66/38). 

Krishna is Worthy of being gifted (74/24). 

Krishna is the Punisher of the wicked (69/17). 

Krishna is the God of gods (80/44). 

Krishna is rarely cognisable by the gods (48/27). 

Krishna is unconcerned about body, house, etc. (60/20) 

Krishna is the Supreme Ruler of the greatest gods (73/8). 

Krishna is the Exponent of Religion (69/40). 

Krishna is the Eternal Son of Nanda (14/1). 

Krishna is Visible to man with great difficulty (71/23). 

Krishna’s Presence mocks the world of man (70/40). 

Krishna is the Object of palatable drink of the human eye (71/33). 

Krishna is the Internal Guide of all (31/4). 

Krishna is Worthy of the worship of all the worlds (69/15). 

Krishna accommodates all the worlds (59/30). 

Krishna is the Manifestor of all light (63/34). 

Krishna is unstinted in giving Himself away to one who recollects Him (80/11). 
Krishna is the efficient Cause (87/50). 

Krishna’ although devoid of all mundane quality, assumes mundane qualities by 
His Inconceivable Power for the purposes of creation, etc. (46/40). Krishna is 
not subject to change (64/29). 

Krishna is not capable of discrimination by reason of being void of any 
extraneous covering (87/29). 



Krishna is the Giver of Himself to those who covet nothing (86/33). 

Krishna loves those who covet nothing (60/14). 

Krishna does no work (60/20). 

Krishna is Human, Hidden, Primal Person (Purusha) (44/13). 

Krishna is Present in the hearts of jivas like the five elements (82/45). 
Krishna is the Supreme Sorcerer (70/37). 

Krishna is Supreme Godhead and the Internal Guide of all (56/27). 

Krishna is the Crest-jewel of those whose praises are sung by the sacred lore 
(71/30). 

Krishna is Primal Person and Ever-existing (14/23). 

Krishna is the Highest among the Objects of worship (74/19). 

Krishna is the Healer of the miseries of the submissive (73/16). 

Krishna is the Destroyer of the sins of the submissive (31/7). 

Krishna is the Destroyer of the distress of the submissive (73/8). 

Krishna is the Residue after the Cataclysm (87/15). 

Krishna is devoid of touch with mundane senses (87/28). 

Krishna is the Soul and Friend of all animate entities (29/32). 

Krishna is devoid of distinction appertaining to an alien (63/38,44). 

Krishna is Inconceivable by His Nature (70/38). 

Krishna is the Master of the Universe (70/37). 

Krishna is the Nourisher of the Universe (85/5). 



Krishna is the Sun that cheers the lotus of the kindred of the Vrishnis (14/40). 
Krishna is the God worshipped by the Brahmanas (69/15). 

Krishna is the Foremost of the Brahmanas (84/20). 

Krishna is the Originator of Brahma (40/1). 

Krishna is the Worshipped of Brahma (31/13). 

Krishna loves His devotees (48/26). 

Krishna wears Forms in accordance with the wishes of His devotee (59/25). 
Krishna is eternally Present in Mathura (1/28). 

Krishna is devoid of the sense of kinship and regards all in the same way 
(46/37). 

Krishna is beyond all Measuring Potency (Maya) (63/26). 

Krishna is subdued by the love of Judhisthira (72/10). 

Krishna is concealed by the screen of Maya from the sight of the-people (84/23). 

Krishna does not follow the ways of the world (60/36). 

Krishna is the Destroyer of the fear of the mundane sojourn of the submissive 
(85/19). 

Krishna is the Womb of the Scriptures (16-44, 80/45, 84/20). 

Krishna is Sree Guru’s Own Self (80/33). 

Krishna is devoid of hankering for wife, offspring, etc. (60/20). 

Krishna is the Ordainer of the worldly sojourn and of the summum bonum (1/7). 
Krishna is the Cause of all entities (8514). 

Krishna is the Friend of the good (69/17). 

Krishna is devoid of discrimination as of kinship (63/38, 44). 



Krishna is Existence (56/27). 

Krishna possesses true desire (80/44). 

Krishna is the True Entity (87/17). 

Krishna is True of speech (48/26). 

Krishna is True of resolve (37/12). 

Krishna sees with an equal Eye (16/33). 

Krishna is the Cause of all causes (14/56-57,63/38,87/16). 

Krishna is the Originator of all (59/28). 

Krishna is the Soul’s own self of all jivas (individual souls) (14/55). 
Krishna is Omniscient (16/48). 

Krishna is All Seeing (38/18). 

Krishna is the Embodiment of all gods (74/19, 86/54). 

Krishna is the Seer of all (16/48). 

Krishna is the Lord of all (37/23). 

Krishna is the Stay (ashraya) of all entities (82|46). 

Krishna is All-pervasive and Eternal (9/13). 

Krishna is the Soul of all elements (86/31). 

Krishna is the Knower of the minds of all elements (81/1). 

Krishna is the soul’s self of all elements (74/24). 

Krishna is the Inner Soul of all elements (37/11). 

Krishna is the Internal Guide of all elements (47/29). 



Krishna is the Cause of the origin of all elements (64|29). 

Krishna is the Limit of all good (84/21). 

Krishna is Omnipotent (37/12). 

Krishna is the Lord of Lakshmi, the Presiding Deity of all riches (47/46). 

Krishna is the Internal Guide of all (63/38, 72/6). 

Krishna is the Stay (Ashraya) of all (40/15). 

Krishna is Witness and Seer of Self (86/31). 

Krishna is the Refuge of the good (80/9). 

Krishna is most difficult to serve (88/11). 

Krishna is the Friend of one’s heart (48/26). 

Krishna is the Withholder of Creation (82/45). 

Krishna is Withholder, Creator and Preserver (63/44). 

Krishna is the Master of the functions of creation, etc. (16/49,37/12). Krishna is 
devoid of distinction as of kinship (74/21). 

Krishna is devoid of distinction as between kin and alien(72/6). 

Krishna indwells the Universe created by Himself (48/19). 

Krishna is satisfied by the taste of His Self-Delight (72/6). 

Krishna is the Destroyer of the worldly sojourn of His devotees (60/43). Krishna 
is the Wearer of body according to His Wish (1/7). 

SREE KRISHNA-CHAITANYA MATH, BRINDABAN, MUTTRA. 

CAMP:OFFICE OF' THE CIRCUMAMBULATION SIDDHANTA 
SARASWATI 

OF THE CIRCLE OF BRAJA, MUTTRA (U.P.) 24th Nov., 1932 



Volume I Introductory 

1 Object And Method 

The present work is an attempt to offer a theistic account in the English language 
of the career and teachings of Sree Chaitanya. The number of existing English 
books on the subject is very small. The life and precepts of Sree Chaitanya Mah 
aprabhu by Thakur Bhaktivinode,^J.R.A.S., January, 1897, p. 

130. The book can be had at the Gaudiya Math, Calcutta. 1 the pioneer of the 
movement of pure devotion in our Age, although it gives a true account of 
His life, is a comparatively short work. Other English works on the subject are 
from the pens of self-sufficient misguided amateurs who have had no 
practical experience of the teaching they have professed to expound. This is 
opposed to the dictum of Sree Chaitanya that, “no one is fit to be a teacher of 
religion who does not practice the same in his own life”. None of these works, 
with the solitary exception of that by Thakur Bhaktivinode, deals properly with 
the spiritual side of the teachings of Sree Chaitanya. The available 
authoritative sources of information are quite exhaustive regarding the spiritual 
aspect and offer a narrative of His doings and teachings that is both consistent 
and free from contradictions. To these was added later another body of works of 
a different character by pedantic pseudo-Vaishnava and faithless foreign 
writers, that offer the concoctions of their own respective lines of thought. 
Insincere writers have adopted without apology the point of view and garbled, 
accounts of the pseudo-Vaishnava authors as the basis of their narratives. 

The existing English works although they sometimes profess to be historical in 
reality offer a superficial, extremely crude and misleading view of the 
subject. They confine themselves almost exclusively to the esoteric issues. This 
at least is not the method of the source-books, but a departure from the bona 
fide position of the theme itself. The historical method proper should aim 
at presenting the religion as it is really found in the genuine original sources 
and in the spirit of its first propounders. But many of these writers, due to 
their empirical training, have failed to observe this essential canon of 
historical judgment. Moreover these writers generally happen to be very poorly 
equipped in respect of their knowledge of the vast body of Scriptures to which 



the teachings of Sree Chaitanya stand in the closest relationship; and, even if any 
of them happen to possess a general acquaintance with the texts of 
these Scriptures, they fail to take a scientific view of the subject due to lack 
of spiritual insight. 

The prominent defects that mar the value of these works are the purely empiric 
point of view of their authors, their want of spiritual knowledge of the Scriptures 
and their lack of critical caution in the choice and use of authorities. 

The empiric method is unsuitable for the treatment of a spiritual subject. The 
vision of the empiricist is confined to things of this world. The 
Vaishnava authors on whose narratives we have to base our account of Sree 
Chaitanya, were not empiricists. The subject of which they have left us the 
account, is the Absolute, as distinct from the empiric, Truth that comes down to 
them in the chain of disciplic succession from Godhead Himself. They acquired 
this esoteric vision, when they prove to be true, by the methods of loyal 
submission and sincere service at the feet of spiritual preceptors as enjoined by 
the Scriptures on all those who desire to obtain spiritual enlightenment. They are 
never tired of repeating that the Absolute Truth, inherent in a bona fide soul, 
who expresses himself in their books’ is not derived from any experience of 
this world and is not intelligible to those whose vision is obscured by 
knowledge derived from the experience of this world. 

The Absolute Truth is transcendental and, therefore, no human being can attain 
to Him by his sensuous efforts, i.e., by the ascending process, as all 
phenomena that are exposed to the faulty, limited senses are, by this virtue, 
nontranscendental. The Absolute Truth is eternally existent but is not realizable 
by men so long as they are not relieved of the aptitude, of their defective 
vision. The Absolute Truth is to be received, undoubtedly in the spirit of 
honest inquiry, from those wise men who bear no reference to the world of 
their sensuous gratification. 

Very few of the existing English works on Sree Chaitanya satisfy these essential 
conditions of theistic authorship that are so strongly insisted upon by 
these devotional writers without which such description carries no useful 
purpose. On the contrary, these later writers are apt to offer their own views, 
derived from their empiric association, regarding the subject-matter of the 
original works, in a manner that leaves on the mind of the reader the impression 
that they are more anxious to point out the crudities and errors of these old 



authors than exhibit their views in a scientific and impartial manner. This is 
certainly neither history nor religion but only an uncalled-for and useless 
distortion of both. 

The object of writing this book is to place before the English-knowing readers a 
strictly accurate theistic account, of Sree Chaitanya, Who teaches the 
Absolute Truth that has been handed down through the Ages by an unbroken 
succession of unbiased spiritual preceptors. This narrative is broad-based on all 
the authoritative sources and seeks to fully present the esoteric side as 
explaining the esoteric in pursuance of the method of all really enlightened 
writers on spiritual subjects. 

The superiority of Sree Chaitanya to all other teachers and prophets consists in 
this that He made fully known the Absolute Truth Who was only 
partially unveiled by others. This is the special significance of Sree Chaitanya’s 
Deeds and Teachings. Other teachers of the religion before him had allowed 
more or less the worship of non-Godhead, having had reference and adulteration 
of their present deformities. Sree Chaitanya came into this world to make 
all people understand that in reference to their eternal existence they should 
have nothing to do with non-Godhead. Sree Chaitanya, Who speaks the 
language, is the Absolute Truth in His full manifestation. He has made people 
understand the only true way of approaching Godhead Himself. This is the proof 
that He is Godhead Himself. He is identical with Sree Krishna, not His Self as 
Lord and Proprietor of all things, but in the attitude of the agony of separation 
from the Absolute, i.e., Himself. 

Sree Krishna opposed all addiction to ephemeral thoughts and activities. This 
has been communicated to us through the channel of unbiased preceptors 
who have no other interest except delivering in tact the whole of the Truth 
received by them. The Absolute Truth is sure to be obscured if He is handled 
by elevationists and Salvationists (karmins and jnanins), i.e., by those who 
believe in worldly activities and in freedom from misery by means of 
knowledge gradually gained through the senses. We do not want to learn about 
the Absolute Truth from these. It is only the pencils of ray emanating from the 
Sun when they happen to be received by the retina that enable one to see the 
Sun directly even from a long distance. But we must be very careful that 
nothing foreign interposes between the eye and the Sun, thus obstructing the 
passage of the ray and preventing it from reaching the eye. This is the 
epistemology of Absolute Knowledge offered by Sree Chaitanya. It is followed 



in the brochure of Thakur Bhaktivinode referred to above. My object is only to 
elaborate what is told briefly in that little book and elaborated in the 
Bhagawatam and Charit amrita. 

The peculiarity of my position, therefore, consists in this that I shake off the 
views of the schools of mundane elevationists and Salvationists, the professors of 
temporary enjoyments (bhukti) and permanent release from misery 
attendant upon such enjoyment losing in the process the idea of the individual 
self itself (mukti), for the reason that they do not lead to the Absolute Truth. We 
are absolutists. We believe that our only duty is to follow the Absolute Who 
has His Own eternal plane to stand. We hold that the most intelligent among 
the contemporaries of Sree Chaitanya, those who sincerely followed Him, 
really understood His teaching through serving love. This truth which they 
received from Sree Chaitanya Himself has been communicated to my Preceptor 
by a succession of sincere followers of the Absolute Truth reaching back to 
them. Each one of this succession of preceptors submitted to the conditions of 
sincere pupilage to his predecessors enabling the latter to impart to him the Truth 
by the eradication of temporary, local errors and misconceptions that might 
crop up in unguided critics. Due to this careful transmission of the full 
Truth through unbiased preceptors to my unprejudiced Preceptor, I should 
rightly claim him to be a contemporary of Sree Gaursundar Himself. Other lines 
of teachers who deviate from my Preceptor are Absolutists only to an extent. 

Had they been fully absolutist they would have come under the banner of the 
line of Absolute Truth, which has no affinity of deviating from the Absolute 
proper. 

My Preceptor out of his unlimited mercy, which I craved, brought me to his path 
by himself coming to me and dissuading me from following other ways and 
means of language that would be intelligible to me in my then condition. 

There is thus in my case a direct preceptorial connection extending right up to 
the living sources undisturbed by physical or mental obstruction. The line of the 
Absolutists has prevented us from going astray in any other direction but 
to embrace Absolutism and has given us this careful training. I am a 
regulated being and do not belong to the empiric school as I keep not any view 
of deserting this line to join the challengers. My preceptors have been free 
from mundane references being treaders of the path of the Absolute. We 
are discussing the Deeds of Sree Chaitanya in the light of our preceptors. But 
our preceptors did not tell us this thing in the present form and 



language. Linguistically it is our maiden effort. We do not know whether we 
shall succeed in this. We, however, claim to have received this narrative from 
the living sources. Only the strict followers of Sree Chaitanya can obtain the 
full view of the Absolute Truth. It cannot be had by the followers of any 
other teacher who has a different angle of vision. All other lines only offer a 
partial view. Sree Radha Govinda, the full Truth, is attainable only on this path. 

I should be a sincere follower of my preceptor and of the preceptors of 
my preceptor and have no intention of deviating from my preceptors. There is 
no chance of foreign element getting into my account. There is no hypocrisy. 

The only thing that is new is that I am trying to tell it through the medium of 
a different diction and language, which happen to be different from those of 
my preceptors. 

In this connection it will not be out of place to refer to subtle and unconscious 
prejudices that stand in the way of our giving a real hearing to a purely 
spiritual subject. The life and teachings of Sree Chaitanya are not the special 
concern of any narrow sect. 

The knowledge of it is claimed to be indispensable for the whole animate and 
inert world in as much as Sree Chaitanya is the living embodiment of the highest 
and the most intimate distinctive forms of the service of the Supreme Lord to 
which every being has a claim by his constituent principle. The service of 
Godhead, however, has no affinity with anything of this transitory worlDas in 
the case of meddling with non-God conception. The readers of 
the transcendental Deeds (Leel a) of Sree Chaitanya may be divided into 
three classes, viz., (1) those who read for the satisfaction of idle curiosity, (2) 
those who read for gathering empiric knowledge to suit their taste and to mould 
the same accordingly, and (3) lastly, those readers who are really seekers of 
the Absolute Truth as distinct from the empirical, i.e., who sincerely 
avail themselves of the full opportunity of their reading. 

We need not stop to consider the case of that class of readers —the dilettantes 
and mere literateurs—who read for the satisfaction of idle curiosity. 

Those readers who will approach the subject in a real spirit of inquiry may take 
up one of two possible attitudes. Some of these may consider the subject as 
one that is capable of being understood in. the light of worldly experience like 
any non-spiritual subject. Such persons will accept only those portions of this 
work which may appear to them to agree with their existing convictions. But as 



these convictions, in the case of empiricists, happen to be themselves based on 
the experience of this world, which is changeable, they are in their nature 
only relative, and not absolute, Truth. Those convictions are in fact unspiritual 
and, instead of helping, prevent us from understanding the Absolute. Those 
readers who, failing to grasp this real difference between the spiritual and the 
physical and mental, may try to understand the subject with the help of their 
empiric knowledge are bound to be dissatisfieDas they proceed with this study 
and the net result of their labour in going through these pages may be even to 
confirm them more strongly in their empiric, i.e., unspiritual, attitude. The object 
of study in such case will be entirely missed. 

That class of sincere readers who, recognising the difference between the 
empiric and the spiritual Truth, are inclined to seek for the latter only in 
these pages and may be prepared for the purpose to disregard, at least for the 
time being, the clamorous opposition of their empiric convictions, and are thus 
in a position to give the narrative a patient and sympathetic hearing, will be 
thereby enabled to understand gradually the reason why the most sincerely 
religious people happen to cherish the subject of this work with such tender 
and absorbing devotion. 

It is not possible to enter into the spirit of a subject unless a really patient hearing 
is given to it. But it is very difficult to submit with patience to listen to a subject 
that is declared to be situated completely beyond the scope of all experience and 
convictions of the hearer. The ordeal that faces us on the threshold of spiritual 
life is truly formidable. It is only such people who combine openness of mind 
with a sincere desire to know not the empiric, changeable, relative, but the 
Absolute, unchangeable, eternal Truth, that are enabled by the grace of Godhead 
to listen patiently to a spiritual narrative which appears to be almost needless 
from the point of view of the empiricist. 

The transcendental career and teachings of Sree Chaitanya are bound to prove to 
be of the highest interest to all sincere seekers of spiritual enlightenment. 

The fact that Sree Chaitanya appears to be born in Bengal need not mislead those 
readers who belong to a different country into supposing that His teachings are 
meant for the people of Bengal or of India, of this or of a former Age. It is 
difficult for most to free their minds completely from national, ethnological or 
chronological prejudices in these days of militant nationalism and empiricism. 
But the real meaning of the career of Sree Chaitanya will be missed if He be 



regarded merely from any mundane point of view, viz., that of race or 
nationality; limited time or limited space; physical bearing; 
intellectual endowment, caste, creed or colour, etc. His teaching and activities 
belong to the plane of the Absolute which transcends all the petty unwholesome 
limitations of our worldly existence. Let the sympathetic reader lay aside these 
subtle and unconscious prejudices and allow the eternal Truth to enter the mind 
thus opened out to Him, without hastily passing the final judgment by a 
mere cursory look at the title page. Whatever the quarter from which the 
Absolute Truth enters His appearance and, in this matter His choice is free, the 
Absolute Truth when He actually knocks at our door should be assured the 
unreserved welcome that is His due from those who really seek for Him. 

The sincere reader need also be on his guard against specific misconceptions at 
the very outset, of an unfavourable kind. The Deeds and Teachings of 
Sree Chaitanya have been consciously or unconsciously misrepresented by 
most modern writers. We have already referred to this fact. Any idea, favourable 
or unfavourable, regarding Sree Chaitanya that the reader may have 
already formed from the writings of these authors or their partisans may be 
temporarily laid aside to allow of an impartial hearing being given to the present 
narrative. Dogmatism, superstition or self-sufficiency can never lead to spiritual 
progress. Our readers are much more likely to gain what they require if they do 
not reserve any contrary thought which is likely to receive these tidings coldly 
or present them from taking Up a sympathetic and inquiring attitude. The 
advice is to stop temporarily any conception that they may have already formed 
and even to dismantle an awkward construction that may lie across the path of 
their following the course of the narrative with seriousness of purpose. 

The message of the transcendental realm that has come down to this phenomenal 
world through the medium of sound is known as the Veda (i.e, knowledge), or as 
the Sruti (i.e., that which is heard), as the ear alone of all the organs of sense is 
fit to receive the distant message which is transmissible only in the form of 
sound. The Absolute Truth, for the simple reason that He happens to be located 
beyond the reach of our physical senses, cannot be directly perceived by us. All 
the other senses, viz., those of touch, sight, smell, taste require, as the condition 
of perceiving any object, actual contact with the same. But the ear possesses this 
special peculiarity that it can perceive an object in subtle form without being in 
gross material contact with it. As for example it is possible to hear about London 
from Calcutta by means of the ear. It is not possible to learn anything about 
London from Calcutta, in the same natural way, by means of any other sense. 



The Scriptures, i.e., writings, are but the visualized -revealed transcendental 
sounds. Therefore it is not so extraordinary as it seems at first sight that of all 
our present organs the ear alone should be privileged to receive the message of 
the Absolute. The transcendental sound is, however, different from ordinary 
sound inasmuch as it is. identical with the object denoted by it, while the object 
denoted by the latter is different as object from the sound which is a symbol to 
signify the object without itself being the object. 

The identity of the transcendental sound with the object denoted by such sound 
is due to the fact that everything on the transcendental plane happens to be an 
entity of incomprehensible infinite dimensions. This is not submitted to the 
present limited understanding of man which is strictly limited to entities of three 
dimensions only. The transcendental Truth possesses unity and is infinite by His 
Nature. All this is contrary to our limited reason and so accustomed we are to the 
rationale of limited experience that it appears to us to be therefore irrational. 
Unless this really irrational opposition of our finite reason is temporarily stopped 
it will effectively bar all access to the real infinite. But once the voice of 
Godhead is allowed really to enter our attentive ear He will purify our perverted 
reason and render it fit to appreciate that which in its present degraded state it is 
unfit to understand. Let us, therefore, assume for the present that unwholesome 
heterogeneity is not possible in the Absolute Who is altogether unitary in His 
character. 

The rational necessity of revelation for our knowledge of the Absolute should be 
perfectly clear. The alternative to this are the multifarious spurious 
theories regarding the Absolute that have been put forward from time to time by 
the human mind. These man-made theories are, and can be, neither conclusive 
in themselves nor in agreement with one another. They are liable to 
constant modification with the progress of empiric knowledge These wrong 
theories can never lead us to the Absolute Truth Who admits no such self- 
contradiction as is inevitable with empiricists. The word of GodheaDas revealed 
in the Veda, i.e., by means of the recorded transcendental sound, has been, and 
will ever remain the only rationally possible source of all human knowledge 
regarding the substantive nature of the unchallengeable Reality. 

There is thus nothing irrational ab initio in holding that the Veda is the Word of 
Godhead Himself. The Veda exists from eternity. The Veda, according to His 
own version was originally revealed in this world to Sree Brahma the first jiva to 
appear in the realm of physical Nature, and by him made available to other jivas, 



that have since made their appearance in this world in course of time through the 
channel of disciplic spiritual succession. 

The Veda contains the Absolute Truth Whose service is the eternal and universal 
function of the proper nature of all entities. Not being made by any one the Veda 
is free from all taint of narrowness, error or partiality. The path to which He 
points is the only one that should be trod by every soul if he wants to walk in the 
way of Truth. It is necessary to put off all prejudices against the authority of the 
revealed Scriptures arising out of misapprehension of the nature of the subject. 
The admission of the supreme authority of the Veda does not involve the utter 
annihilation of thinking. On the contrary it is the Absolute Truth Who enables us 
to find the real value of empiric thought and its relation to ourselves. Nor does 
the acceptance of the Veda involve the rejection of the Scriptures of other 
countries. The revealed portions of all the Scriptures are one and the same. They 
are the Word of Godhead differing only in the degree of manifestation. This 
oneness of all revelation will become clearer in course of this narrative. 

The Veda is self-existent and eternal. It was not made by anybody. It has the 
quality of attracting to itself the devoted homage of all sincere souls. Men of this 
world love a thing by reason of its worldly benefits for themselves. There 
is nothing in the shape of worldly value to explain the acceptance of the Veda 
by the most sincere seekers of the Truth. It is as if one is irresistibly 
attracted towards a chance passer-by and welcomes him into one's house by 
a spontaneous instinct. No extraneous circumstance, no previously found 
ties, would explain this spontaneous liking. It must be entirely due to some 
innate excellence in the object of such attachment. The Veda has ever been loved 
in this impartial and detached attitude. Theories that are made can 
mislead inasmuch as they attempt to substitute the convictions of their authors in 
place of those of others. It is the substitution of one untruth in place of another, 
due to the vanity or spite of clever or aggressive thinkers. There is no room 
for impartiality in such case. The Absolute Truth alone is really impartial. 

His impartiality is the cause of the acceptance of His service by sincere souls. 

The Absolute Truth Who finds implicit expression in the Vedas and the 
Upanishads, has been put into a systematic and more explicit form in 
the Brahmasutra of Sree Vyasadeva. In this remarkable work the subject has 
been treated under the four heads of (1) relationship of everything with Godhead, 
(2) solution of apparent heterogeneity that is found in Nature, (3) the means 
of spiritual realisation, and (4) the object of spiritual function. The 



Brahmasutra establishes the existence of personal Godhead, and devotion as the 
means of realising transcendental love for GodheaDas the final object of such 
activity. 

The Authority of the Brahmasutra, as part and parcel of the revealed Scriptures, 
is admitted by ah transcendentalists. The chain of disciplic succession in the case 
of Sree Vyasadeva is as follows. Sree Vyasadeva received the Word from Sree N 
arada who received it from Sree Brahma, the first god representing the bound 
creation, to whom it was communicated by Sree N ar ayana Himself, 
i.e., Personality of GodheaDas He exists in Sree Vaikuntha, the realm that is 
free from ah limitation. 

The Brahmasutra gives us the Truth in a highly condensed form. It is the 
textbook of ah theistic philosophy. The conclusions embodied in it and their 
significance have been elaborated in a number of commentaries written 
by different authors. 

Sree Vyasadeva is also the author of the Srimad Bhagawatam which gives us the 
comprehensive history of the transcendental activities of Godhead Himself 
and of His different Avataras. The deeds of Sree Krishna Who is declared by 
the Veda to be Godhead Himself, as He is, constitute the central theme of this 
great work The Srimad Bhagawatam thus forms, as it were, the natural 
commentary, in the concrete or explicit form, of the Brahmasutra, from the pen 
of their common author. 

The Deeds of Sree Chaitanya, the Subject of the present work, are the living 
Embodiment of the teaching of Srimad Bhagawatam. The Deeds and 
Teachings of Sree Chaitanya stand alone as history of the service of the Supreme 
Lord in the form of the deepest and perfectly unreserved intimacy. 

The privilege of this form of service, the hidden truth of ah Scriptures, was never 
before given to the fallen jiva. In the words of Sree Rupa Goswami Prabhu, the 
authority on the esoteric significance of the Deeds of Sree Chaitanya, “God 
Himself with the beautiful golden complexion out of mercy appeared in this 
world in this most degenerate Age to confer the grace of devotion to Himself, of 
the superior order that had not been given to this world before. Even the Geet a 
which teaches the service of Godhead with singleminded devotion and in the 
spirit of complete self-surrender, does not tell us much about the actual, concrete 
form of the highest service. The Srimad Bhagawatam describes ah different 



kinds of service in the concrete form and establishes the supreme excellence of 
that which was practised by the transcendental milk-maids of Braja. Sree 
Chaitanya is the living Embodiment of this highest and most intimate form of 
the service of the Divinity. 

The Brindabana pastimes of Sree Krishna, which have been given the place of 
honour in the greatest devotional work of the whole world, are of all forms 
of Divine service the one that is also liable to be most grossly misunderstood. 
The subject will be treated in greater detail in its proper place in the body of 
this work. It will suffice for our purpose here to state that Sree Chaitanya 
made clearly manifest by His Deeds and Teachings what this form of service 
really means. His Deeds are in fact the Brahmasutra, Geet a and the 
Srimad Bhagawatam displayed to our view in the living form. He is the living 
Vedanta. Other Avatars and prophets have taught the reverential worship of the 
Supreme Lord. Sree Chaitanya proved by His Deeds that the highest form of 
service is to be found in the Srimad Bhagawatam, that its inner meaning had not 
been properly understood up to His time by anybody and that it offers what all 
the Scriptures have been endeavouring from eternity unsuccessfully to express. 

Sree Chaitanya's own career is the concrete living expression of this highest 
form of the service of the Lord. 

The Deeds and Teachings of Sree Chaitanya offer everything that is contained in 
the whole body of the Scriptures of this country or of any country. They give us 
the complete view of the Absolute, which is not to be found in any 
Scripture. And because it is the full view of the Absolute Truth that we get that 
the Deeds and Teachings of Sree Chaitanya possess the quality of solving all 
doubts and difficulties. It has the power of delivering from the thralldom of this 
limited existence the elevationists who base their hope for mankind on 
worldly activities and also the empiric philosopher who is caught in the cobweb 
of his own ephemeral speculations. It throws open the gates of the limitless 
world to all sorts and conditions of people by simply presenting the complete 
view of the Truth which reconciles all apparent contradictions and composes all 
the seeming differences and discords that so trouble the material world and, 
in their place, it establishes the reign of universal spiritual Harmony. 

No apology is needed from the historian of the Deeds of Sree Chaitanya for 
anything in His transcendental career. His Deeds and Teachings, as we find them 
recorded in the immortal works of His associates and followers, are not the 



concoctions of the human imagination. Anyone who reads these sublime works 
with an open mind, is bound to be convinced of the Absolute reality of all those 
Activities. The task of the historian of Sree Chaitanya is rather not to miss the 
least detail of His Divine career. This may not appeal to the taste of those 
historians whose vision is incapable of passing the line of secular interests. But 
they nevertheless constitute the most momentous facts of theistic history and are, 
in fact, the goal to which all history leads and in which it should find its supreme 
fulfillment and real explanation. 

The pseudo-Vedantists are specially liable to under-estimate the significance of 
the concrete activities of personal GodheaDas constituting His 
fullest manifestation. According to them the Vedanta is a mere theory of the 
Absolute and is, like any product of mental speculation, an abstract subject; 
although such view is clearly opposed to that of Sree Vyasadeva himself who 
would otherwise have not been at so much pains to describe minutely every 
detail of the Activities of Godhead Himself and of all His Avataras and assign to 
the Braja Pastimes of Krishna-Chandra the place of honour in his comprehensive 
history of the Divinity. This is the subtle danger that threatens all who put their 
trust in empiric wisdom. The Deeds of Sree Chaitanya are the practical 
refutation of all casuistry and empiric speculations regarding the Absolute that 
are to be found in all parts of the world. 

The writer has ventured upon a task that is by its nature super-human not from 
any pride of empiric knowledge. This task of propagating the eternal religion 
of all animate beings has been handed down to him in the regular line of 
spiritual discipleship. It was the wish of Thakur Bhaktivinode to spread the 
knowledge of the eternal religion taught and practised by Sree Chaitanya to all 
countries outside Bengal through the medium of the English language. The 
writer would be failing in his duty towards his spiritual preceptor and towards 
the growing community of the pure devotees who are desirous that the wish of 
Thakur Bhaktivinode, the same as that of Sree Chaitanya Himself, should be 
carried out, if he did not make a sincere effort of putting into the English 
language information that he has received from his predecessors. The writer 
feels no misgiving in thus offering to the world at large this message of the 
Absolute inasmuch as in doing this he is only performing a duty that has 
devolved on his unworthy shoulders in the regular chain of disciplic succession. 
He makes his prostrated obeisances at the feet of the preceptor who opened his 
sealed eyes by the spike of the collyrium of spiritual knowledge and all the 
devotees of the Supreme Lord that the word of God may through their mercy 



find expression in these pages. 


The Absolute Truth cannot be discovered by the ascending effort of the human 
mind. Such effort, as a matter of fact, leads to quite the opposite direction. 

The Absolute Truth has been appropriately compared to the disc of the Sun. It is 
not possible to find out the Sun during night with the help of the most 
powerful lamp that can be devised by the ingenuity of man. The Sun can be seen 
only by means of rays that come from itself. The Sun is visible when it is above 
the horizon and there is nothing to obstruct our vision directed towards it. The 
Sun is seen easily enough when these conditions are fulfilled. The Absolute 
Truth is like the glorious disc of the Sun that is always above the horizon. But 
we bound jivas cannot see it as we are led by our empiric knowledge to direct 
our sealed eyes to the opposite direction and on the mists and clouds of 
worldliness that further, obstruct our view. It is transcendental Truth that is 
offered in these pages and not any speculations of the writer. This transcendental 
Truth Whom he has received from his preceptor and Whom he is trying to impart 
to others is not something that can be challenged by the limited reason of man. 
His predecessors have been enabled to receive Him by submitting to Him, i.e., 
by listening to and accepting Him in the sense of practising and preaching 
the same. This constitutes the sole justification of the present undertaking. 

The writer is desirous of serving the Absolute Truth by telling Him to others as 
by doing so he can serve himself and all animate beings in the only really 
useful way. 

This eternal function of the proper selves of all animate beings that has been 
taught by Sree Chaitanya and all the revealed Scriptures is at once profound and 
easy. It is easy because it possesses the quality of satisfying the wants of foolish, 
senseless and unlettered persons. It is also profound inasmuch as it is capable of 
benefiting the most erudite scholars, i.e. those who are masters of the art of 
controversy and most deeply versed in the scriptures. This combination of 
apparently opposite qualities is not to be found anywhere else in this world. In 
fact any one who is free from bias can be heir of this religion; on this 
simple condition it lies open to all mankind. The idealist no less than the 
practical man of action is equally enabled by its means to successfully cross this 
great ocean of limited, physical existence. But unthinking worldly minded 
people have always been misled by its perverse forms as it has been often 
misrepresented by the malice, worldly interest, or ignorance of its pseudo¬ 
preachers. The only way that is open to bound jivas for disentangling themselves 
from the fetters of ignorance and thereby regaining their natural condition of the 



spontaneous, spiritual service of the Lord, is that offered by the methods of 
listening to the transcendental deeds of the Godhead from the lips of His 
devotees and making the same known to others by obeying the Word of God in 
their actual conduct and preaching it to others. It is only by constantly listening 
to the Word of God from those who exclusively serve the Absolute and 
practicing the same with body, mind and speech that the fallen jivas are enabled 
gradually to get rid of their materialistic hallucinations which stand in their way 
of realising their own proper nature and its true relationship with God and 
therefore of serving Him in the proper manner. 

The materials for the present work have been drawn from— (1) the 
Sikshastakam of Sree Chaitanya which gives the summary of His teachings 
in His own words; (2 and 3) the Karchas (memoirs) of Sree Murari Gupta and 
of Sree Swarup Damodar (the latter as embodied in his works by Sree 
Raghunath Das Goswamin, Sree Swarup Damodar’s closest associate); (4) 

Prema Vivarta of Sree Jagadananda; (5) Sree-Krishna-Chaitanya-Chandrodaya- 
Nataka of Kavi Karnapur; (6) Sree-Chaitanya-Charitahakavya of Sree 
Chaitanya Das, the elder brother of Kavi Karnapur; (7) the works of Sree 
Prabodhananda Saraswati; (8) the Bhajanamrita of Sree Narahari Sarkar Thakur; 
(9) the numerous works left by five of the famous six Goswamins; (10) Sree 
Brindbandas Thakur’s Sree-Chaitanya-Bhagawat; (1)) Sree Lochand as's 
Chaitanya-Mangal; (12) Sree Krishnadas Kaviraj’s Sree-Chaitanya- 
Charitamrita and lastly (13) the works of those later writers who have strictly 
followed the above authors. Most of these works are in Sanskrit, some of them in 
Bengali. 

Sree Chaitanya has not left any books written by Himself. A few shlokas 
composed by Him are quoted in the works of His associates, the chief of 
them being the Sikshastakam which gives in eight stanzas a summary of 
his teachings. 

Sree Murari Gupta was the constant companion of Sree Chaitanya’s younger 
days. His memoirs are a careful record of the activities of Sree Chaitanya 
at Nabadwip. Sree Swarup Damodar attended on the person of Sree 
Chaitanya night and day throughout the period of His long residence at Puri. His 
memoirs which have not come down to us in their separate form are the chief 
authority as regards Sree Chaitanya’s latter career and relied upon by all 
the contemporary writers. Sree Krishnadas Kaviraj Goswamin in his 
detailed account of this part of Sree Chaitanya’s career made use of the 



information which he obtained directly from Sree Raghunathdas Goswamin who 
was the spiritual ward of Sree Swamp Damodar to whose charge he was 
committed by the express command of Sree Chaitanya Himself. Pandit 
Jagadananda was the loved playmate of Sree Chaitanya’s boyhood and His 
constant companion to the end. Kavi Karnapur was the son of Sree Sivananda 
Sen, one of the closest associates of Sree Chaitanya. Sree Chaitanyadas was the 
elder brother of Kavi Karnapura. Sree Prabodhananda Saraswati was the 
contemporary of Sree Chaitanya. He was a native of Southern India and the 
younger brother of Sree Venkata Bhatta at whose house at Sree Rangam Sree 
Chaitanya resided for the period of four months during His travels in the South. 
Sree Pr abodhananda Saraswati was the uncle and preceptor of Sree Gop al 
Bhatta, one of the six Goswamins. Sree Narahari Sarkar Thakur was one of Sree 
Chaitanya’s principal associates. 

Of the six Goswamins Sree Rupa and his elder brother Sree San atana were 
instructed by Sree Chaitanya Himself in regard to the subject-matter of 
their respective works. Sree Raghun athDas Goswamin got his information from 
Sree Swarup Damodar and he himself associated with Sree Chaitanya. Sree 
Gopal Bhatta’s connection with Sree Chaitanya has already been mentioned. 

Sree Jiva was the nephew of Sree Rupa and San atana and was the disciple of the 
former. 

Sree Brindabandas Thakur was the recipient of the favour of Sree Nityananda, 
the associated facsimile, so to say, of Sree Chaitanya. His mother Sree 
Narayani was the niece of Sribash Pandit, the foremost of those Vaishnava 
householders who were the direct followers of Sree Chaitanya. Sree Lochandas 
got the materials of his work partly from Narahari Sarkar Thakur, one of 
Sree Chaitanya’s close associates and by his devotional impressions. Sree 
Krishnadas Goswamin got his information as has already been mentioned from 
his preceptor Sree Raghunathdas, one of the six Goswamins . 

Most of the works of the authors named above are still extant and they are the 
authorities for all subsequent writers. The chief of these later authors 
whose works have been consulted in the compilation of the present account are, 
(1) Sree Narottamdas Thakur who was the disciple of Sree Lokanath 
Goswamin, one of the closest associates of Sree Chaitanya, (2) Sree Viswanath 
Chakravarty belonging to the line of disciples of Sree Narottamdas Thakur, (3) 
Sree Baladev Vidyabhusan the first Gaudiya commentator of the Brahmasutra, 
(4) Sree Narahari Chakravarty in the line of disciplic descent from Sree Viswan 



ath Thakur, (5) Sree Bhaktivinode Thakur, the sincere guardian of the 
true Vaishnavas of the present day, and (6) my Sree Gurudeva, His Divine 
Grace Paramahansa Paribrajakacharya Sree Sreemat Bhaktisiddh anta 
Saraswati Goswami Maharaj whose mercy is my only hope of attaining the 
service of Godhead. 

It will be seen from the above that there is no lack of materials of the most 
reliable character available to the historian of the Career and Teachings of 
Sree Chaitanya. It is, therefore, rather strange that the personality of Sree 
Chaitanya has been misunderstood and misrepresented by a certain class of 
writers. The neglect of the original sources was one cause of this. A constructive 
motive was supplied by the animosity of sectarians and the greed of worldly 
interests of pseudo-followers. 

It was the life-work of Thakur Bhaktivinode to re-discover the true history of 
Sree Chaitanya and make the same available to the present generation. 

The magnitude of this service to his country, to humanity and to all animate 
beings time alone will show. The eternal religion taught and practiced by 
Sree Chaitanya have been made intelligible to the modern reader by the labours 
of Thakur Bhaktivinode. It is bound to re-act most powerfully on all 
existing religious convictions of the world and make possible the establishment 
of universal spiritual harmony of which the whole world stands so much in 
need. Most of the works of Thakur Bhaktivinode were, however, written in 
Bengali and Sanskrit. The present work is a slight attempt to present in the 
English language an outline of the Life and Teachings of Sree Chaitanya made 
known by Thakur Bhaktivinode, the pioneer of the movement of pure devotion 
in the present Age, which aims at restablishing in practice the eternal religion of 
all animate beings revealed in the Scriptures and taught and practiced by 
Sree Chaitanya. The activities of my most revered Preceptor are well known to 
the world. His Divine Grace is commissioned by Godhead to spread the 
Teaching of Sree Chaitanya to every village of the world and re-establish the 
spiritual society. This was foretold by Thakur Bhaktivinode. 



2 The Real Nature Of Sree Krishna 


The historical aspect of Sree Krishna need not be considered as irrelevant or 
mundane. The Absolute is always no other than Himself. 

Antiquarian speculations regarding the historicity of Sree Krishna have thus, 
inconceivably to us, an intimate bearing on the question of the real Nature of the 
Absolute. The scheme of ancient History of India that is being worked out by 
the researches of learned scholars has not yet been conclusively settled in regard 
to the lay affairs of that remote period which may have witnessed the Great 
War that is reported to have been fought out on the plains of Kurukshetra 
between the Kurus and the Pandavas backed by their respective allies. But the 
time is not far distant when it will be practicable to avoid prejudices 
and misunderstandings that at present prevent our approaching that great event 
in the proper spirit The Puranas are steadily winning the confidence of the 
most hostile critics and the actual occurrence of the Great War is coming to 
be recognised, on the authority of the Puranas, as having taken place at a 
period which is not very far from 3000 B.C. The narration of the Mahabharata 
may now be seriously accepted as providing a tentative basis for the historical 
career of Sree Krishna. The Harivamsa, which forms the supplement of the 
Great Epic, is not opposed to the Mahabharata either in the spirit or in the so- 
called assumptions regarding particulars of the career of Sree Krishna that do 
not appear in the Great Epic. 

The difficulty in regard to the Bhagawatam has also become susceptible of 
historical handling If that great Purana was actually composed in the 
ninth century A.D., as seems not very improbable it should still be 
historically possible to accept its testimony regarding even the events of the 
Boyhood of Krishna. But from the lay point of view, this question is not of 
absorbing interest in as much as the politically important activities in the career 
of Sree Krishna belong to a later period. But from the point of view of religious 
history, the story of the marvelous Boyhood of Krishna is all-important and 
demands our most careful consideration. 

The Mahabharata deals exclusively with the Doings of Krishna as King of 
Dwaraka and Ruler of the Yadavas. But the mighty Deeds of Krishna recorded in 
the Mahabharata form no part of the worship of Sree Sree Radha- 
Govinda, which is the subject matter of the present work. Bhandarkar, in his 
anxiety to redeem the worship of Krishna from the charge of immorality, might 



prefer,the worship of the wedded Husband of Rukmini to that of Sree Sree 
Radha-Krishna. But the Bhagawatam makes the Pastimes of Brindabana the 
heart and kernel of the whole narrative of its deeds of Krishna as the Divinity, 
and it is this which supplies all the materials for the prevalent worship of Sree 
Sree Radha-Govinda. The political Krishna occupies but a secondary position, if 
even that, in the sphere of worship. 

The narrative of the Bhagawatam so far as it covers the same ground as the 
Mahabharata does not differ materially from the story told by the Epic. But 
the interpretation and point of view of the Bhagawatam is throughout 
explicitly different from that of the Mahabharata even in its treatment of those 
events that are common to the two works. The later date of the appearance of 
the Bhagawatam, together with the new perspective adopted and the 
prominence given in it to the Boyhood of Krishna, has given rise to the doubts 
regarding the authenticity of its story of the Boyhood of Krishna, which is, 
however, also found in several other Puranas of an admittedly more ancient 
date. 

Sectarian manipulation of history is assumed to be responsible for difference of 
version in the treatment of even historical events that are connected with 
the origin and growth of creeds. Theologians are supposed to be often ready to 
be unmindful of any version that may appear to them to be opposed to the 
tenets of the creed that they happen to profess. The Bhagawatam , judged by 
this canon, has appeared to certain scholars as being less reliable, in the 
considered historical sense, than the Great Epic. This view is also supposed to 
cut at the root of the reality of the religion itself. The issue regarding religion 
may be put thus: Did the Pastimes of Krishna at Brindabana manifest themselves 
on the mundane plane at any period in the ordinary historical sense? 

The answer should be, even from the historical point of view, partly, in the 
affirmative and negative. The Bhagawatam is regarded by the Absolutists 
as being both a work of the medieval period as well as the very Body of 
the eternally existing Truth Himself. The argument, viz., that as it happens 
to belong to the medieval period it cannot also at the same time be eternal that 
is without any origin, is inapplicable to the Bhagawatam . The case is exactly 
the same with the Brindabana Pastimes.. They are also regarded to be eternally 
true. They are at the same time claimed to be historically true. But they are 
not claimed to be merely historical events. They are, therefore, claimed to be 
as being both old and new, or neither. They are not regarded as limitable by 



the mundane categories. 


It, therefore, becomes necessary to widen the scope of-the historical method 
itself in order to treat such a subject with any principle of consistency. 

The adherence to the scheme of gradual evolution of the creed has to be got rid 
of. The test of contemporary evidence as proof of authenticity should be found 
to be even more misleading for this particular purpose than it always is 
ordinarily. 

What is the reality of the degree of validity of contemporary evidence in the 
ascertainment of the Truth? I record my opinion regarding a certain phenomenon 
actually occurring before my very eyes. The statement is made up of the 
narration of the occurrence and my individual opinion regarding its nature and 
other particulars that I may suppose have a bearing on it. The narrative portion is 
separated from opinion by the critics, and is accepted in that unexplained form as 
historically true. If Krishna actually passed His Divine Boyhood in Brindabana 
and performed at that place all the miracles before the very eyes of all the 
people, the older narrative of the Mahabharata, it is argued, should have also 
been cognizant of the same. If those miracles had been the most important of all 
the Activities of Krishna, Who is the Hero of the Epic, they could not have been 
altogether omitted by the writer of the Great Epic as they must have been actual 
and well-known occurrences. Such argument, although legitimate within its due 
limits in the case of mundane events, does not apply without a good deal of 
modification to the Pastimes of the Divinity. 

It is an option of the servants of Krishna, which they are not loth to exercise, to 
divulge His Activities, or keep Them concealed from the knowledge even 
of contemporaries. Those activities possess the special quality of being 
recognised as true in the real and not merely historical sense, as soon as, and 
whenever, they are so divulged to the unerring consciousness of the pure 
individual soul. 

On the other hand, the reality is impossible of being ever “discovered” by the 
empiric historical method. 

The Absolute chooses to present His deluding face to the sense-perception of 
man. His deluding energy is all-powerful and is able to prevent the search 
and discovery of the Truth, for Whose service, however, every individual soul 
has an imperative necessity. The tentative categories of the mundane Logicians 



are no other than fetters of the deluding Energy that tend to produce the 
strange belief that the transitory and limited are necessarily also true. It is 
this undoubted “fact” that vitiates the current short-sighted “historical” method 
at its source. The reality of the Ocean is neither proved nor disproved by 
the admission or denial of the ignorant dweller of the Taklamakan Desert. 

Such admission or such denial is equally abortive and wide of the mark if 
the observer has no knowledge of his subject. The issue itself as regards the 
Truth does not exist for the pedant of the waterless desert of the narrow and 
closely barriered Hinterland of Empiricism. 

What value for instance are we to attach to such “historical” finding as this 5 viz., 
that the teaching of Sree Chaitanya was the cause of the political downfall 
of Orissa? Sree Chaitanya teaches that the Absolute is served by all 
conditions, beings and events, either consciously or unconsciously as regards the 
agents themselves. The decline as well as the rise of empires and worlds serves 
equally in their tiny ways the uncompassable Absolute. As soon as their relation 
of service to the Absolute is grasped by the agents, the real consciousness of 
the Truth is produced in the humble agent. So long as the Absolute continues to 
be pedantically regarded as a part of Physical Nature, as cause or effect, there is 
no consciousness at all even of the issue itself of the real Truth. Sree Chaitanya 
and His Activities belong to the plane of the Absolute. The empiric historian, 
with his geographical and chronological apparatus of observation, can have 
really no proper idea of the grotesque anomaly that he unconsciously perpetrates 
by his pedantic effort to gauze the Absolute by the standard supplied to her 
victim by His deluding Energy in the form of the mundane categories that can 
only limit and define, whereas the function that is required to be performed is to 
get rid of the necessity of having to do either. 

If Srimad Bhagawatam , which professes to treat of the Absolute, is considered 
to be an object of this phenomenal world, how can it possibly impart to a person 
who chooses to entertain such illogical thought, any knowledge of its contents? 
The recipient of the consciousness of the Absolute as well as the communicant 
of such consciousness must alike belong to the plane of the Absolute 
consciousness. The empiric consciousness is not in the plane of the Absolute 
consciousness at all. It can only bungle and commit a deliberate blunder by 
attempting to limit and define the immeasurable and undefinable under the plea 
of a necessity that need not be supposed to exist at all. 


It is possible, if the limitations of the mental equipment are fully remembered 



and allowed for, for a person desirous of treating the subject on the plane of 
the Absolute to write the cautious narrative of the Activities of Godhead in 
the limited vocabulary, without falling wholly into the deliberate blunders 
of dogmatic empiricism. The revealed Scriptures belong to the class of 
such authentic records regarding the Absolute. They need not be produced at 
the time of appearance of the events on the mundane plane to be 
historically acceptable as conveying the direct or first hand testimony of those 
occurrences. They are quite independent of the conditions which the mind of the 
empiric historian finds it impossible to shake off and which make it impossible 
for him to conceive of the possibility of spiritual occurrences. 

Therefore, empiric speculations regarding the so-called “historicity” of a 
spiritual event instead of establishing its genuineness, only serve to display 
the utter insufficiency of the empirical historical method itself for the purpose 
of the treatment of the history of the Absolute. 

For example, the complaint of the empiric scholar, that it is not possible to set 
forth the nature of the development of spiritual life in India for lack of 
definite chronology which renders a scientific classification of the original 
works treating of Indian religion impossible, however plausible in itself it may 
appear to be at first sight, is, in the light of the foregoing discussion, at once 
found to be after all only the result of a wholly deluded attitude towards the 
Absolute Himself. As if the development of spiritual life is capable of being 
measured by the process of so-called mundane evolution based on the 
chronological sequence of mundane occurrences! 

Our contention is not that the Pastimes of Sree Krishna are historical events but 
that they are a revelation of the Truth in the form of historical events. 

The Pastimes of Sree Krishna are not, therefore, less true than any historical 
events whatsoever. They are much more. All the historical events of this world 
will be enabled to disclose the real elements of the Truth that they represent only 
when they would be set forth in their proper relationship to the only eternal 
Verity, viz., the Pastimes of Krishna. It is the historical events and the canons 
of historical judgment that require to be brought into tune with the Truth, Who 
is no other than Krishna. But the empiric historian does the exact opposite of 
this. He assumes the truth of historical events and his canons of historical 
judgment as the standard to which the Pastimes of Krishna are to conform for 
the realisation of any element of the Truth that they may contain ! 



The whole difficulty is ultimately due to the muddled way of thinking favoured 
by the empiricists that supposes itself to be self-sufficient for the purpose 
of finding the Truth. It is empiricism that requires to be made properly 
conscious of its limitations and to be forced into a serious consideration of the 
nature of the Truth Whom it professes in and out of season to be so willing to 
serve. 

Once the nature of the Truth is taken into our serious consideration, the 
inconclusiveness of the cult of historicity should be perfectly plain to 
every impartial thinker. Further anxious consideration of the subject should 
enable the empiric method to be limited to its proper scope and by such 
limited employment to be enabled to serve the quest of the Unlimited. 

As soon as the mind is directed to the question of the Nature of the Truth, it is 
enabled by Tmth Himself to understand the otherwise inexplicable 
postulations of the spiritual Scriptures that it is necessary to obey in order to 
attain to the plane of the real quest of the Truth. Every circumstance even of this 
world will then be found to be a help in the realisation of the Truth, and nothing 
will be found to be a hindrance. The only hindrance, as a matter of fact, is the 
empiric attitude itself. By the empiric attitude one is led to launch out on the 
quest of the Absolute Truth with the resources of admittedly utter ignorance. 

This foolhardiness must be made to cease. The method of submissive inquiry 
enjoined by the Scriptures should be substituted after being properly learnt from 
those who have themselves attained to the right knowledge of the same by the 
proper method of submission. It is only after one has actually obtained the vision 
of the Truth, Whose face is so completely hid from the sight of the 
empiric thinker, that one can, under the guidance of the Truth Himself, set out on 
the quest of the Truth with any chance of finding Him and proclaiming Him 
to others. 

So, although the method that has been employed throughout this narrative may 
appear to be inconsistent with the demands of the blind empiric judgment, 
the reader is requested for the very much more weighty reasons set forth above 
to lend his listening ear to an attempt to apply the methods of the 
revealed Scriptures for the purpose of describing the real Nature of Krishna and 
His Pastimes, in pursuance of the mercy of the authorized Teachers, on the 
ground that the method is the only one that claims to be applicable to the subject 
of the Absolute. 



As the working knowledge of the Nature of Sree Krishna is the starting point of 
the search of the Truth, it is my purpose in this chapter to present the reader with 
a summary of the traditional account of the real Nature of Sree Krishna, which is 
revealed by the Scriptures of all Ages and countries in more or less explicit 
forms. 

The outline of the history of Sree Krishna as told in the Bhagavatam, which may 
be accepted as the only authentic account for our purposes, is as follows At 
the close of the cycle known as Dwapara Krishna manifested His Appearance 
in Bharatabarsha. He was born at Mathura. He was the Son of Vasudeva. 

His mother was Devaki, the sister of King Kamsa of the race of the 
Bhojas. Apprehending harm to himself from the Issue of Vasudeva and Devaki, 
Kamsa, that unworthy scion of the Bhoja, had cast the immaculate couple into 
the royal prison which was most closely guarded. As they passed their days 
inside the prison of Kamsa six sons were born in succession to Vasudeva and 
Devaki. All of them were killed in their infancy by the cmel and fearful Kamsa. 
Sree Balarama was born as their seventh issue. He was transferred to the keeping 
of Rohini in Braja as foster-mother, the report being circulated that there had 
been miscarriage at childbirth. Godhead Himself was the eighth issue of 
Vasudeva and Devaki. He was conveyed by Vasudeva to the home of Nanda in 
Braja, whose wife Yasoda had just then given birth to a daughter. Sree Krishna 
was left to the care of Nanda and Yasoda in Braja and their daughter was brought 
to Kamsa's prison and exhibited as the eighth issue of Devaki. 

Meanwhile Sree Krishna was growing up in Braja in the company of His brother, 
Rama. Putana, an adept in slaughtering infants, was deputed by Kamsa to kill 
Krishna under the pretense of giving Him suck by the profession of motherly 
affection. Putana was killed by the halo of the power of the Infant Krishna. The 
casuistical demon Trinavarta was slain. The cart for conveyance of their 
baggages under which Krishna had been put to bed by His parents was smashed 
by the kicks of the Divine Infant. He showed his mother, by opening His mouth, 
that the whole world was accommodated therein. He made her see that nescience 
served to foster love for the power of the Truth. The Infant displayed much 
juvenile ignorance that was promotive of love for Himself, the True Cognition. 
Noting the waywardness of her child the matronly milk-maid, embodying the 
most exquisite degree of serving zeal, bethought of binding Krishna by means of 
hempen cords; but in vain. But the Incompassable at last submitted to be bound 
by the exclusive love of the affectionate Mistress of Nanda’s home. Krishna 
broke the twin Arjuna trees in course of His childish sports, releasing the sons of 



a god who had been reduced to that pitiable condition. Even the gods are liable 
to lapse into the senseless condition of trees by addiction to evil deeds; and even 
trees are enabled to regain the spiritual condition by the influence of accidental 
association with the pure-hearted. 

Krishna goes into the forest with His chums for pasturing the calves. There He 
slays the demon Batsasur who represents the offenses of boyhood. It is now 
that religious hypocrisy in the form of Bakasur brought up by Kamsa, is also 
killed by Krishna of pure understanding. Aghasur also is slain. He is the 
embodiment of the principle of cruelty. Thereupon Krishna dined out in the open 
on the banks of the Yamuna in the company of His chums. The four-faced 
Brahma stole the calves and the cowboys. The orderer of the phenomenal world 
was thereupon deluded by the power of Krishna. By this episode the 
complete supremacy of the immaculate Sweetness of Sree Krishna over every 
other principle, was demonstrated. Krishna, the Beloved of the realm of the 
perfect cognition, is not subject to any regulative restrictions. This also 
was established. The opulence of Krishna suffers no curtailment even by the 
total destruction of all spiritual and non-spiritual realms. No one is able to 
set bounds to the incompassable ocean of the Power of Krishna. The evil- 
minded Dhenukasura, the ass of blunt judgment, was destroyed by Baladeva, 
the principle of the pure individual soul. The serpent Kaliya, the self 
of crookedness and malice, polluted the waters of the Yamuna, the mellow 
liquid of the spiritual principle. This wicked demon was thereupon slain by 
Hari. When the wild forest-fire, the evil of internal faction within the 
community, burst forth in all its destructive fury, Sree Krishna in Person 
swallowed it up. Thus the Lord is ever solicitous of the well-being of Braja. 

Then Rama killed the demon Pralamba, the thief in disguise who was sent by 
Kamsa for stealing the children. 

And when the sky began to be surcharged with the love-laden clouds heralding 
the advent of the showery season, the milk-maids of Braja, who are loved 
by Krishna and are by their nature of a loving disposition, felt intoxicated 
by singing the Praises of Krishna. They were deeply stirred by the strains 
of Krishna’s flute. They now worshipped Yogamaya who effects the union of 
the individual soul with Krishna, with the desire of gaining Krishna as their 
Lover. Those who are possessed of a strong desire to serve Krishna find that 
there is no adjustment regarding themselves or their relation with others that 
is necessary for the purpose, of which they need feel ashamed. They are no 
longer disposed to conceal their minds. Krishna stole away the clothes of those 



milkmaids at their bath to disclose the perfectly nude state which is the 
immaculate sporting ground of Divine love. Sree Krishna feeling hungry begged 
for food that had been prepared for offering at the sacrificial ceremony by the 
ritualistic Brahmanas. But they did not give it to Him in the pride of their 
superior status. Those sacrificial Brahmanas were addicted to a variety of 
empirical interpretations of the Scriptures inspired by the desire of attainment of 
worldly prosperity or by love for barren speculation which ends in the negation 
of all specific forms of activity. By dint of their traditional attachment to the 
Scriptures and the by-gone ancestors they are apt to degenerate into the mere 
mechanical transmitters of the rules and taboos that are found in the 
Scriptures. By reason of this vain attitude they are disabled to understand that 
the attainment of love for Godhead is the only purpose of all those rules 
and regulations. How can people with such mentality be induced to serve 
Krishna. But the loyal wives of those sacrificial Brahmanas, despite the 
opposition of their husbands, repaired to Sree Krishna in the forest and 
surrendered themselves to the Feet of the Supreme Soul. This demonstrates the 
truth that neither intellectual nor hereditary equipments are the cause of love for 
Krishna. It also lays down the right principle of conduct of conditioned souls 
as consisting in regarding everything with an equal eye. The varna and 
ashrama institutions of man are intended for the regulation of the society of this 
world. 

If the social order is preserved it affords scope for association with pure-hearted 
persons and thereby offers opportunities for discussions regarding the 
supreme desideratum. These tend to spiritual progress. It is the possibility of 
attainment of love of Krishna by their means that constitutes the value of the 
institutions of varna and ashrama (the system of divinely ordained division of 
social functions and grades). There can, therefore, be no disloyalty to the 
purpose of the social arrangement if one gives up the observance of the social 
rules for the sake of Krishna Himself. As a matter of fact, on the actual 
attainment of the goal itself, the further pursuit of the means of its attainment 
becomes unnecessary for all persons who are really desirous of obtaining the 
goal. It is also no infringement of the purpose of the social code to allow such a 
person full scope for serving Krishna. In enforcing social obligations it is, 
therefore, necessary to consider the actual condition of individuals to whom they 
are to apply. Otherwise the very object of social organization itself will be 
wholly frustrated. 


Hari then forbade the people to perform the sacrifice to Indra. The people were 



wont to sacrifice to Indra to please him in order that he might send them 
rain which was necessary for the sustenance of themselves and their flocks. 

This represents the principle of utilitarian work on the basis of mutual co¬ 
operation for the safety and well-being of society. Indra being denied his 
offerings, in anger tried to punish the denizens of Braja by sending down 
torrential rain which flooded the fields and homesteads of the people. Hari 
Himself protected the residents of Gokula from this peril. No harm can come to 
the servants of Krishna if for the purpose of serving Him even their ordinary 
domestic and social duties have to be given up altogether which may result in the 
destruction of the world. No one can kill whom Krishna Himself protects. Even 
the cosmic law is not binding on them. The devotees of Krishna are free from 
all observance of all law except that of spiritual love for the Supreme 
Lord. Through the realm of faith there flows the perennial stream of the 
holy Yamuna. The transcendental river is the liquid essence of the pure 
cognitive state. Nanda was in danger of being drowned in the waters of that river 
of joy, but was mercifully rescued by his Son’s blissful Activity. Thereafter 
Sree Krishna showed the cow-herds His Own Divine Majesty in the realm of 
the Absolute. The Divine Majesty is always latent in the Personality of Krishna. 
The Supreme Lord Who is the Beloved of the eternally free souls and their 
following then performed the Pastime of the Dance in the circle of His beloved. 
This Pastime manifests the principle of working of Divine love. Lord Hari, out 
of His mercy, danced in the Rasa circle formed by the milk-maids. He promoted 
the -growth of their highest love by separation, by His subsequent 
disappearance. 

The stellar system may supply a poor analogy of the Rasa Pastime. Just as the 
Suns surrounded by their respective circling groups of satellites dance round the 
Polar Star in the form of a circle, in the same manner, all individual 
souls eternally enact their harmonious dance in their orbits round Sree Krishna 
as the centre of the system, sustained therein by the force of Sree 
Krishna’s overpowering attraction for all spiritual entities. In this vast round of 
the Rasa dance, Sree Krishna is the only Male and all individual souls are 
females. In the realm of the Absolute Sree Krishna is the sole Master and 
Enjoyer. All the rest belong to the category of servants and objects of enjoyment 
that minister to His sole pleasure. The Rasa Pastime is capable of being 
analogically described in the vocabulary at our command only in terms of the 
sexual relationship. The reason of this is that there is a real correspondence 
between the two—the sexual relationship of this world being the unwholesome 
reflection of the spiritual process in the mirror of this material world. The 



analogy is, however, bound to prove misleading if due allowance is not made for 
the radical difference between the substantive nature and location of the two 
processes. 

The principle of mundane amour resting on that of physical sex can never be 
divested of its innate grossness and unwholesomeness. The grossness of worldly 
enjoyment as well as the sensuousness and frailties of both the object and subject 
of the sexual passion, are responsible for the imperfections of mundane amour. 
The Rasa Pastime is absolutely free from any touch of unwholesomeness, all the 
conditions being favourable for the promotion of the most perfect bliss by 
universal association in the rites of the most exquisite love. No apprehension of 
lewdness or sexuality must, therefore, be allowed to stand in the way of the 
exhaustive consideration of this highest and allimportant spiritual subject. 

The circular amorous dance or the Rasa Pastime expresses the manifestation of 
Divine love in its perfectly unobscured form. The highest realisation of 
this process consists in this, that in it Srimati Radhika, the highest object of 
all reverence of all souls being that supreme blissful Power of Krishna 
who expresses His specifically luscious quality, appears in person in the circle of 
the dancers, in all Her most exquisite charm encompassed by the bhavas, her 
suite of the most confidential female friends. At the close of the Pastime of 
the circular dance there follows naturally sporting in the liquid current of 
the Yamuna, the cognitive essence itself dissolving into liquid bliss on the 
full manifestation of love. 

Nanda who is the personality of spiritual bliss, is swallowed up by the boa- 
constrictor of the joy of the liberation of merging in the Divine Essence. Krishna, 
the Protector of His devotee, thereupon rescues him from his peril. The stubborn 
demon Sankhachura, who sets fame over every other principle, is then slain in an 
attempt to create disturbance in Braja. Keshi, the demon of the vanity of political 
ambition, is next slain by Krishna, the Foe of Kamsa, when the Lord finally 
made up His mind to return to Mathura. 

Akrura, the contriver of all occurrences, then conducted Hari to Mathura. On His 
arrival there, the Lord killed the sturdy wrestlers and then also slew 
Kamsa himself with his younger brother, on the departure from this world of 
atheism in the person of Kamsa, Sree Krishna bestowed the charge of the earth 
on Kamsa’s progenitor, Ugrasena, who embodies the principle of 
independence. The twin widows of Kamsa thereupon repaired to their parent, the 



King of Magadha, the embodiment of elevationism, and submitted to him their 
sorrows of the state of widowhood. On receiving this tiding, the King of 
Magadha set out at the head of his armies and fought seventeen mighty battles 
about the city of Mathura, but was every time defeated by Hari. When 
Jarasandha at last beleaguered Mathura for the eighteenth time Krishna retired to 
His own Capital of Dwarakapuri. The real significance of this episode consists in 
this, that the potency of the principle of elevationism is constituted of the 
eighteen categories of the ten personal lustrations from birth to death, the four¬ 
fold classification according to aptitude and the four-fold division into stages of 
the individual life (varnashrama). When the seat of knowledge is finally 
captured by these eighteen categories by fostering renunciation of the world, 
there is manifested the disappearance of Godhead on the consequent emergence 
of the longing for pseudo-liberation. 

While Krishna abode in Mathura, He placed Himself under the charge of the 
teacher of religion, and after completing His study of all the Shastras, 
restored the life of His preceptor’s dead son. There is no necessity in the case of 
Krishna, Who is naturally perfect, to endeavour for the acquisition of 
knowledge. The episode indicates that the intellect of man makes progress in 
erudition during its stage of residence at Mathura which is the Academy of all 
learning. 

Those who covet the fmits of their activities also cherish attachment to Krishna. 
Their attachment to the Lord is charged with impurity. The attachment by 
degrees grows into the well purified unadulterated liking for Krishna. This 
salutary truth is manifested in the case of Kubja’s love for Krishna during His 
sojourn in Mathura. Uddhava went to Gokula to be acquainted fully with the 
loving state of Braja which is superior to all forms of devotion. 

The Srutis affirm that the Pandavas represent the branch of righteousness, while 
the Kauravas are the offshoots of unrighteous conduct. For this reason, 

Sree Krishna is verily the Friend and Preserver of the family of the Pandavas. In 
order to establish the well being of righteousness and for the deliverance of 
sinners, the Lord deputed Akrura to Hastina as His messenger. 

Jarasandha, the champion of unwholesome fruitive activity, beleaguered the 
beautiful city of Mathura, the abode of the knowledge of the 
undifferentiated Greatness and Nourishing Quality of the Divinity (Brahman). 
Here the point that is established is that fruitive activity itself is of two kinds. 



One variety is directed to the supreme desideratum itself. By such activities there 
is growth of knowledge and by their conjunction liking for Godhead is 
developed. This conjunction of activity, knowledge and the principle of Divine 
service, is also variously designated as the process of karma, jnana or bhakti. 
Those w ho possess real insight, call it the method of Harmony. But there is a 
different variety of activity which is directed to a selfish purpose. This form is 
known as karma-kanda, to distinguish it from the process of what is termed 
karma-yoga. This selfish variety of fruitive activity often gives rise to 
apprehension regarding the existence and attainment of Godhead and promotes 
their union with atheism by wedding them with the latter. It is this unwholesome 
variety of worldly activity that in the person of Jarasandha invaded the city of 
Mathura. 

Thereupon, Sree Krishna, of His own accord, conducted His friends, viz., the 
community of His devotees, to the city of Dwaraka. This is the process of 
the service of Godhead under the regulative principles of the Divine 
Dispensation. The Yavana king belonged to a society that was not regulated by 
the Divinely ordained principle of class and stage (varnashrama). Being thus 
addicted to ignorant utilitarian activity and relying on the resources of such 
activity and being thereby opposed also to the path of liberation by empiric 
knowledge, the Yavana king scornfully kicked King Muchukunda representing 
aptitude for the path of liberation. The Yavana king was thereupon destroyed by 
the superior power of King Muchukunda. Hari then repaired to Dwaraka, the 
seat of the Knowledge of the Divinity in all His Majesty. There the Lord wedded 
Rukmini Devi, Embodiment of the Supreme Majesty of Godhead. Pradyumna, 
God of love, was no sooner born from the womb of Rukmini, then he was stolen 
away by Sambara, embodiment of the deluding Energy. The body of the God of 
love had formerly been burnt up by Mahadeva, representing barren asceticism. 

At that period Rati Devi, consort of Kama, God of love, had sought refuge in 
the demoniac propensity for the lust of the flesh. Kamadeva of great prowess, 
being now instructed by his consort Ratidevi, killed Sambara representing 
the pleasures of the flesh and made his way to Dwaraka. By way of restoration 
of the gem, Hari now wedded the auspicious Satyabhama, who is part and 
parcel of Sree Radhika, the fullness of the quality of extreme loving 
sensitiveness. Rukmini, with seven other ladies, were the reflections of the 
Power of the most delicious and the very highest Divine love, appearing in the 
conditions of Splendour and Majesty. They became the chief Queens of the 
Royal Home of Krishna at Dwaraka. At Dwaraka Sree Krishna’s offspring and 
relations multiplied apace. This points to an essential difference that 



distinguishes reverential worship rendered to the Majesty of Godhead from that 
of loving devotion. The former naturally tends to expand by the process of 
division. The latter is indivisible. It is not possible to deal with this matter in 
greater detail at this place. But the subject requires to be most carefully treated in 
a separate treatise. 

A certain demon proclaiming himself to be Vasudeva preached the doctrine of 
undifferentiated Monism, at Kashi, the abode of Hara. The Lord of Roma, 

Who is Godhead Himself, after slaying that demon, burnt Kashidham, the seat of 
that corrupt opinion. The Lord seated on the back of Garuda slew the 
demon Bhauma who was filled with the notion that the things of this material 
universe are Godhead. This is idolatry. The worship of the Holy Divine Archa is 
not to be confounded with the worship of idols. The latter consists of the two 
coordinated varieties of pseudo-worship of Nature in its positive and 
negative aspects. Godhead rescued the victims of idolatry by destroying the faith 
in the undifferentiated Brahman, which is the subtle and more dangerous one of 
the two forms of idolatry and by accepting the worship of their quondam 
victims. By killing Jarasandha by the agency of Bheema, the. Lord rescued many 
a king from the bondage of elevationism (worship of pure worldly utility). 

He accepted unrestricted worship at the sacrifice of Yudhisthira and cut off 
the head of Shishupala who was a personal enemy of Himself. At the battle of 
Kurukshetra, Krishna afforded relief to the Earth groaning under her burden and, 
having re-established the pure religion, saved spiritual society. 

On His arrival at Dwaraka, the sage Narada was filled with great wonder on 
beholding the Lord appearing at one and the same time in the homes of all 
His different Consorts. The fact that Godhead is fully present everywhere and 
in every soul, is much more wonderful than that He is One and pervades 
the whole universe by His Divine Essence. The demon Dantavakra, embodiment 
of barbarism, was slain. The Lord bestowed on Arjuna, His brother by the 
religion-bond, the hand of His Own sister Subhadra in marriage. The Lord saved 
the city of Dwaraka by destroying the efforts of Salwa backed by the knowledge 
of the deceptive physical sciences. The beautiful products of material sciences 
are nothing in comparison with the Doings of the Lord. King Nriga was 
undergoing the punishment of unrighteous conduct in the form of a reptile. He 
was delivered from the condition of a reptile by the mercy of the Lord. 

Hari ate the raw rice given Him by the Brahmana Sudama, out of love. The Lord 
is not so pleased with the offering of even sweatmeats that are made by 



the pashandas (unbelievers). The monkey Dibida representing un-Godly 
carnival, was killed by Baladeva embodying the essence of the pure soul full of 
the love of Krishna. Baladeva performed the Pastime of love in the company 
of milkmaids who were the different substantive aspects of the pure soul, in 
a great forest in which there was a city made of the cognitive principle of 
the pure soul. 

These Divine Pastimes are enacted in the hearts of the devotees. They disappear 
with the termination of the earthly sojourn of the devotees, just as the 
show ceases on the actor leaving the stage. The Will of Krishna, in the form of 
Time, having made the Yadavas, pure spiritual states, desist from their 
Pastimes, overwhelmed the Divine Abode of Dwaraka by the waves of the ocean 
of oblivion. The self-same Will of Krishna, who is the Source of ceaseless 
joy, made the devotees give up their bodies, worn out by decay, and by 
fomenting mutual discord, at Prabhas, representing the Knowledge of the 
Divinity. The aptitude towards Krishna that dwells in the hearts of the devotees 
attains to its pristine glory by its conjunction with the pure soul on his severance 
from the physical body. It continues its full manifestation in Goloka which is the 
highest portion of the realm of Vaikuntha. 

These Activities of Sree Krishna never cease in Goloka, which is the innermost 
Sphere of the realm of the Absolute and the Abode of the Supreme Lord in 
the manifest unobstructed enjoyment of His own pure Nature. They are available 
to the conditioned soul in terms of the categories of time, space, and agent, 
in proportion to the realisation of his proper spiritual nature. This realisation 
may remain confined to the detached relationship of the individual soul to the 
Lord or expand into the form of a social function. It is this latter form that made 
its appearance in the pure consciousness of Narada and Vyasa in the cycle of 
the Dvapara Age. The spiritual consciousness is, therefore, susceptible 
of manifesting its appearance in terms of the activities of individuals and also 
of those of the community of pure souls. With the growth of the social instinct 
the second form of manifestation makes its appearance in due course. 

Regarded from the point of view of the associated spiritual consciousness Hari is 
realised as fully manifest in Mathura, more fully in Dwaraka, and most fully of 
all in Braja. The degree of purity of its blissfulness, is the measure of 
the Plenitude of the Divine Manifestation. Judged by this standard, the 
joyous activities of Braja form the highest platform of the spiritual realisation of 
the individual soul. In this most blissful experience Krishna is ultimately 



realisable as the Sweetheart of the spiritual milkmaids, the very highest point in 
the process being the Blissful Activities of Krishna as the Beloved Consort of 
Sree Radhika. 

Those who have been enabled to taste the sweetness of these spiritual 
realisations, are fully established in the eternal function of the pure soul. It is not 
possible to elaborate the quality of the liquid sweetness of the process by means 
of general terms. It is for this reason that the poetic sages have expounded the 
Truth of the Activities of Krishna by their detailed concrete descriptions. The 
Supreme bliss is obtainable only by the most solicitous service of Krishna. It is 
not possible to attain real and abiding satisfaction by the contemplation of 
Godhead as the Regulator and Companion of the individual soul, or by the 
realisation of the Greatness of the undifferentiated Divinity by the process of 
empiric Knowledge, or by worshipping Godhead by the method of the Sacrifice 
(yajna) as the Giver of the fruits of utilitarian activities. 



3 The Highest Worship Of Sree Krishna 


The method of the worship of Krishna at Braja is the highest of all forms of 
worship. The worships that are practiced at Mathura and Dwaraka, respectively, 
owe their value in augmenting the exquisiteness of the Pastimes of Braja. It is 
our purpose, therefore, to consider the worship of Braja in some detail at this 
place. The discussion of the worship of Braja should not be withheld from the 
cognizance of the conditioned souls, as by means of this alone they can be really 
benefited. It is only when the conditioned soul is in the position to realise the 
nature of the mode of worship at Braja that he is freed from the fear of death, by 
obtaining the life eternal. 

The subject of the worship of Braja may be conveniently considered by the 
related methods of synthetic or positive and analytic or negative 
treatment. Synthetically regarded the worship resolves itself into a system of 
relationships divisible in their turn into five distinct grades. These grades are 
called respectively the tranquilized state, condition of a servant, that of a friend, 
that of parents, and finally that of consorts, in the order of increasing 
excellence from the point of view of the detached observer. 

In Braja certain denizens always regard themselves as the servants of the Prince 
of Braja. Others consider themselves as His fortunate friends. Sridama, Subala, 
etc., possess the pure friendly disposition. Yasoda, Rohini, Nanda are actuated by 
undiluted parental affection. The consorts, with Sree Radhika, at their head, 
regard themselves exclusively as the promoters of Krishna’s amorous love in the 
dancing circle. Nowhere else except in Brindabana can there exist these 
dispositions of pure exclusive relationships with Krishna. It is for this reason that 
pure souls feel an instinctive attraction for the charming Brindabana In 
Brindabana the Scriptures agree in declaring the amorous disposition to be the 
highest of all. By the principle that Godhead happens to be the sole Enjoyer of 
every entity, the individual soul is proved to be eternally ministrant to the 
pleasure of Sree Krishna. In Braja, however, there exist no dividing limitations 
as between Krishna and the serving individual souls like those that separate the 
master from the servant in this world. On the contrary, there always prevails 
indivisible supreme bliss in the visible form of these allloving relationships. The 
consideration of loving separation also finds a place there for the sole purpose of 
augmenting still further the happiness of loving union. This blissful disposition, 
which belongs only to Braja, is realised in its gradual development by the careful 



preliminary service of relationships that obtain outside Braja in Mathura and 
Dwaraka. 


The conditioned soul is eligible for service of Godhead only under the strictest 
regulations. At a subsequent stage, on the appearance of attachment for Krishna, 
the disposition of Braja gradually manifests itself. At this latter stage Krishna is 
served internally with loving devotion, but outward regard is displayed towards 
the regulative social institutions. This duplicity of disposition and practice is 
known as Parakiya (relationship as to a paramour); because the condition of the 
devotee resembles that of the wedded wife who may have unfortunately 
contracted a passion, which is not to be indulged, for a person other than her 
lawful husband. In these circumstances, the really loyal wife is under the painful 
necessity, from an innate sense of duty, of showing all outward regard that is due 
to her husband and of observing scrupulously the domestic and social 
regulations, although she can no longer feel for them any real internal 
attachment. 

The apparently unintelligible and insincere attachment to society of the highest 
class of devotees cannot avoid being misunderstood by those comparatively 
advanced pupils who are in a position to appreciate the beneficient nature of the 
Scriptural regulations for the promotion of the spiritual well-being of society. 

But the highest class of devotees do not modify their method out of deference to 
adverse criticisms even of such bona fide objectors. Those novices who are not 
well advanced on the spiritual path are still less able to understand the ways of 
loving devotion which actuate the best devotees. 

There is a regular gradation in the growing manifestation of the pure 
spontaneous attachment for Krishna. The growth of such attachment is 
capable of being divided into three distinct stages in order of increasing 
excellence, viz., (1) the love of conditioned souls adulterated by endeavour to 
follow the Scriptural regulations, (2) love for Krishna on the Absolute plane but 
wanting in the quality of intimacy, and finally (3) perfect love for Krishna free 
from all extraneous dross. The limit of pure love for Krishna in Sree Radhika, 
the Counter-Whole of Sree Krishna Himself, is termed mahabhava (the 
loving condition major). Different fro. n the specific nature of mahabhava , but 
closely approximating the same, there is found the eightfold assemblage of the 
bhavas inhering in the pure individual souls. They are the eight Sakhis (the 
Cher ami) of Sree Radhika. The bhavas of worshippers adjoining those of the 
sakhis, are the manjaris (spray). The worshipper should in the first instance seek 



the protection of the manjari whose bhava corresponds to the worshiper's 
own nature. He is, thereafter, to offer his submission to the sakhi who is served 
by the manjari. If he obtains the mercy of the sakhi he will be enabled thereby 
to attain to the refuge of the feet of Sree Radhika. In the circle of the great Rasa- 
dance the worshippers, manjari, sakhi and Srimati Radhika, occupy 
positions that are very much analogous to those of the satellite, planet, the sun 
and the polar star respectively in the mundane stellar system. In the process 
of augmentation of bhava, the promotion of the enjoyment of Krishna 
becomes available for jeevas who have attained to the qualitv of mahabhava. 

There are eighteen obstacles in the way of this exquisite consummation of bhava 
which belongs to Braja. These are apt to pollute pure love and give rise to 
offense. It is imperatively necessary to consider the nature of these obstacles by 
way of the negative treatment of Braja-bhava, which should supplement 
and help to prevent any grave misconception of the positive exposition. 

The first obstacle is one's encounter with the pseudo-Guru. The bad Guru is no 
other than the demoness Putana who offers the suck of her poisoned breast 
for killing new-born Krishna in the purified cognition of the soul. Worshippers 
who have already obtained admission to the path of loving devotion should 
ponder on the appearance of Putana in Braja and be thereby enabled to 
remove the initial obstacle, viz., the bad spiritual guide. The Guru is either the 
inner or outwardly manifested spiritual Guide. The soul in the state of 
perfect concentration in the absolute samadhi, is the Guru of the soul. In other 
words a person who places himself under the guidance of the reasoning faculty 
and learns from it the method of worship, thereby gives the direction of himself 
to the pseudo-Guru. 

The dallyings of the empiric assertive rational faculty with the eternal religion by 
the offer of her support for its furtherance, are comparable to the artifices of 
Putana. Worshippers on the path of loving spiritual devotion owe it to 
themselves to discard all assertive help of reasoning in the attempt to realise the 
nature of the summum bonum, and seek instead the exclusive guidance 
of spiritual concentration. The human being from whom one learns about 
the substantive nature of worship of Godhead is the outwardly manifested 
Guru. The bona fide Guru is the person who after realising the true nature of 
the endeavour of loving devotion, instructs the submissive disciple 
(sishya) regarding the summum bonum, taking into due consideration the 
specific requirement of the latter. One who presumes to instruct others without 



himself realising the nature of the course of loving devotion, or who, although 
himself cognizant of the nature of the path of devotion, instructs the disciple 
regarding the same without due consideration of the aptitude of the latter, is the 
pseudoGuru. It is necessary by all means to renounce the guidance of such a 
Guru. 

The second obstacle on the path of loving devotion, in the order of appearance, 
is wrong speculative controversy. In Braja, i.e., on the path of spontaneous love, 
it is difficult for the proper spiritual state to appear until the demon Trinavarta, 
embodiment of disloyal controversy, has been killed outright. All philosophical 
speculation, all skeptical arguments of the pseudo Buddhists and empiric 
rationalists, are obstructive of the growth of the disposition of Braja, in the 
manner of the demon Trinavarta. 

The third obstacle is represented by the laden cart. The injunctions of the 
Scriptures are apt to be followed in their literal sense without due regard to their 
meaning. This carrying of the lumber of Scriptural learning tends to smother the 
infant Krishna and requires to be smashed with His help at the very outset, if the 
object of the novice be to realise the state of natural love for Krishna. The 
mechanical pedant has no access to Braja. The victims of the pseudo-Guru are 
liable to fall into this plight by being prematurely initiated into the process of the 
state of a female confidante engaged in service as of the manjari. Such victims 
do not realise their misfortune by reason of their mechanical aptitude which is 
exploited by, the pseudo-Guru to their utter ruin. Those who follow the advice of 
such a Guru in their worship, quickly fall away from the path of devotion. The 
amorous mood in such cases can never attain to the depth of the truly spiritual 
process. But this is never realisable by the parties themselves. 

The fourth obstacle “on the path” is termed juvenile offense. Persons who are 
indifferent to the spiritual guide are thereby rendered subject to 
the inconsistencies and frailties that beset naughty children. This enemy of 
the infant Krishna is known as Batsasura. The novice must beware of the guiles 
of this malicious demon and try to get rid of him at an early stage. 

The fifth obstacle makes its appearance on the path of the theists (Vaishnavas) in 
the form of the demon Baka. He is an exceedingly cunning fellow embodying 
the principle of religious hypocrisy. It is this obstacle which is meant by the 
offense against the Holy Name. Those who, falling into the clutches of the 
pseudo -Guru by neglect of the proper exercise of their judgment, deceive 



themselves by consenting to adopt the higher grade of worship to which they are 
not entitled, fall under the category of the third class of offenders described 
above. But those who, even after becoming aware of their unfitness, persist in 
practicing the higher method of worship, hoping thereby to gain honour and 
wealth for themselves, commit the offense of religious hypocrisy. Until this 
defect is discarded, there can be no appearance of the principle of spontaneous 
liking for Krishna. These hypocrites only deceive the world by the display of the 
external insignia of sectarianism and pseudorenunciation. Those persons who 
choose to show their regard for these arrogant persons in consideration of the 
external marks exhibited by them, failing to attain the favour of Krishna, only 
prove to be thorns in the sides of the people of this world. But It should also be 
borne in mind in this connection that one should be careful not to allow his 
caution in regard to the abuse of external signs to betray him into maligning a 
person wearing the respective external marks of the theistic communities, whose 
conduct may also embody the inner significance of those symbols. It is, 
therefore, the constant duty of the Vaishnavas, by being neutral as regards 
external marks, to seek for indications of inner love for Godhead and to associate 
with and serve the sadhus whom they may be fortunate enough to recognize by 
this test. 

The sixth obstacle has the forms of cruelty and violence. This is the demon 
Aghasura. It is possible for love to suffer gradual decay by the absence 
of kindness for all animate beings. This must be so inasmuch as kindness 
can never be a different principle from love for Krishna. There is no 
substantive difference between love for Krishna and kindness to individual souls. 

The seventh obstacle assumes the form of infatuation in the shape of an 
apparently zealous study of the Vedas (scholasticism). Excessive and 
exclusive attention to the propositions of the diverse polemical schools and 
their conclusions and modes of argument, tend to lessen the poignancy and 
clearness of the vision of the truths obtained in the exclusive mood. Even 
Brahma himself doubted the truth of the real Nature of Krishna by reason of 
such infatuation. 

The eighth obstacle is offered by the demon Dhenukasura in the form of the ass, 
who tries to prevent the palm fruits, which he is himself unable to taste, from 
being enjoyed by others. The principles of Vaishnavism require for their due 
appreciation the most penetrating judgment. Persons possessed of a blunted 
understanding are exposed to this grave plight. The Vaishnava religion is 



indivisible. There is no scope in it for sectarian narrowness. It is the bluntheaded 
fool who is liable to misconceive the true nature of the Vaishnava community by 
supposing it to be a sect distinct from other sects of this world. As a matter of 
fact thick-headed persons are themselves unable to understand the teaching of 
the spiritual works that have been penned by the former Acharyas of the 
community and they are also apt to actively prevent others from having access to 
those works. This is specially the case with those devotees possessed of a stunted 
judgment who, being mechanically addicted to the regulations have no 
inclination to strive for the attainment of the real status. But the Vaishnava 
religion holds within itself the prospect of infinite progressive advance. Those 
muddy-headed persons, who choose to remain confined within the literal 
meaning of the narrow limits of the Scriptural regulations, being thereby led to 
neglect the unconventional path of spontaneous love for Godhead, soon become 
indistinguishable from persons who are wedded to the cult of fruitive mundane 
activities. It is’ therefore’ never possible to make any progress in the Vaishnava 
religion till Dhenukasura in the form of the ass has been killed. 

The ninth obstacle is offered by the conduct of those weak-minded persons who 
take to the unconventional method of service for the purpose of gratifying their 
senses which it is not possible to do under the method of regulated service. This 
is the conduct of the demon Brishabhasura. These persons will be killed by the 
burning quality of Krishna’s personality. The example of such offensive conduct 
is by no means rare among those hypocrites who make a parade of their 
religiosity. 

The tenth obstacle is offered by the cunning serpent Kaliya, representing 
implacable brutality and treachery, who is apt to pour his deadly poison into the 
melted souls of the Vaishnavas represented by the liquid current of the Yamuna. 
The danger threatened by this fatal poison can be got rid of by the Grace of 
Krishna. 

The eleventh obstacle has the form of intra-communal discord. It is comparable 
to the wild forest-fire. The disposition bred by narrow sectarianism rendering its 
victim unable to recognize as Vaishnava one who does not assume the external 
marks of the theistic community, multiplies the obstacles on the path of 
attainment of the bona fide Guru and the actual companionship of the true 
devotees. It is, therefore, obligatory on all persons to destroy the forest-fire by all 
means. 



The twelfth obstacle on the path of loving devotion is offered by the demon 
Pralambasura who is prone to commit theft against one’s own self. The danger 
is represented specifically by the theory of the Brahman of the Mayavadins who 
advocate merging in the Brahman as the summum bonum and declare the self 
realised condition to be one. that is absolutely devoid of any distinguishable 
feature. The system is characterized by the defect of utter absence of the 
principle of bliss either for the individual soul or for the Brahman who is 
imagined to be perfectly unconcerned about anything. Persistent reflection on 
those lines gives rise to doubt regarding the very existence of the Brahman and 
produces conviction in the non-existence of the individual soul and the elaborate 
concoction of a new science to account for the glaring discrepancies of the 
Acharyas and proving the utter futility of all human thought and activity. This 
mode of thinking sometimes finds its way among the Vaishnavas and creates a 
good deal of trouble in the form of an advocacy of selfdestruction. 

The thirteenth obstacle takes the form of the worship of Indra and other lesser 
devatas in the hope of gaining worldly advantages. This prevents the growth of 
love for Godhead and requires to be avoided with great care. 

The offenses of theft of another’s property and telling of Lies are the fourteenth 
obstacle. These are represented by the demon Byowrasura. They stand in the 
way of one’s attaining to perfect love for Krishna and give a good deal of trouble 
to the novice. 

The fifteenth obstacle arises from addiction to intoxicants. In Braja the bliss, that 
is experienced by the individual soul on his being freed from the troubles of 
mind and body, is termed Nanda. There are found persons who betake to the use 
of intoxicants supposing such habit to be promotive of the above form of bliss. 
This quickly causes the serious drawback of selfforgetfulness. This predicament 
is represented by Nanda's sojourn to the abode of Varuna. This grave offense 
must be avoided by all means. Those persons who have attained the mode of 
loving devotion of Braja must, on no account, use any form of intoxicant. 

The sixteenth obstacle has the form of a proneness to acquisition of fame and 
honour, and desire for sensuous enjoyment, under the plea of devotion. This is 
the demon Shanhachuda. Those persons who covet fame as the goal of their 
activities, commit thereby the offense of arrogance. It is necessary for 
Vaishnavas to be very careful about this matter. 



The next obstacle is offered by the growing sense of blissfulness that tends to 
increase by the cultivation of the habit of worship till it assumes the form of self 
suppression approximating the state of merging with the Object of worship. This 
mood for merging with the Divinity is a species of serpent that swallows up 
Nanda. The novice should endeavour to be a bona fide servant of Godhead by 
carefully avoiding this fatal temptation. 

The eighteenth obstacle is the demon Keshi who has the form of the horse. As 
the quality of devotion of the novice undergoes swift development, the sense of 
one’s own superiority makes its appearance. If the novice gives a free scope to 
the speculation regarding his own excellence, it is apt to lead him into the dire 
offense of disrespect for the Divinity, causing his fall. It is, therefore, necessary 
that such wicked sentiment may never arise in the heart of the Vaishnava. Even 
after devotion has been fully developed the quality of sincere humility should 
never be absent from the conduct of the Vaishnava. As the contrary of this tends 
to happen, it becomes necessary for Krishna to kill the demon Keshi. 

Those who are in the intellectual condition are required to free themselves from 
those offenses which are to be found in the sphere of Mathura. Those who 
have a taste for fruitive activity must be on their guard against the offenses that 
are noticeable at Dwaraka. The devotees should dive completely into love for 
Sree Krishna by avoiding all those obstacles as they are apt to breed trouble in 
Braja. 

The eternal Truth has been made manifest to this world by, Sree Vyasadeva in his 
narrative of the Pastimes of Braja. But the real nature of the Truth cannot be 
realised by means of knowledge born of the senses. The knowledge is 
spontaneously experienced by the pure essence of the individual soul in his 
exclusive state (samadhi). There are, however, pseudo-exclusive states which 
must not be confounded with the spiritual condition proper in which there is no 
presence of any mundane element. In this state the Truth becomes self-manifest 
by the operation of the spiritual Potency of Divinity. This phenomenal world is 
the distorted unwholesome reflection of the transcendental Realm. It is for this 
reason that there is a correspondence between the phenomena of this world and 
the events of the spiritual plane. The substantive reality, in the forms of the 
Name, Form, Quality, Pastimes and the distinctive personality of His 
Paraphernalia make their appearance to the soul in his exclusive state (samadhi). 


It is necessary to keep all doubting speculations at their proper distance, if the 



clear vision is to be maintained in tact. The least intrusion of such disturbing 
element blurs and obliterates the spiritual perception. On the gradual subsidence 
of mundane predilections, the transcendental Truth makes His Appearance by 
corresponding stages, finally attaining His full concrete manifestation in the 
Pastimes of Sree Krishna in Sree Brindabana. If the elimination of sensuous 
speculation is not attended to with scrupulous care, the progress is towards 
abstraction and absence of distinctive features in such realisation. 

If it be our good fortune to attain to the sight of Brindabana, which is full of 
every object of beauty, we would be in a position, with, the fullest assurance of 
the truth of our realisation, to describe, by means of the admittedly imperfect 
instrument of mundane vocabulary that we happen to possess for the purpose, 
the most wonderful and blissful Form of Sree Krishna in Sree Brindabana. Such 
description should not be supposed to be derived from our experience of this 
world. It is the outcome of direct perception of the Substantial Reality of Whom 
the rational phenomena of this world are the distorted unwholesome shadow. No 
realisation of the substance can be reached by the logical manipulation of 
confused speculation regarding His shadow whose only function is to mislead to 
perfection. 

The Beauty of Sree Krishna, described by those who have been fortunate enough 
to realise the vision, is narrated below for the information of the reader; but the 
meaning of the description cannot be grasped except in the perfect exclusive 
state which, is wholly free from any speculative activity born of the mind. 

The Figure of Godhead, fulfilling all requirements of the spiritual principle, is 
like that of man. His Beauty seems to be represented by the 
reflected correspondence of the inexpressibly cooling, soft, yellowish, blue that 
is noticeable in the gem known as "Indranilamani" of this world, or is like 
unto the impression of the first appearance of the rain-bearing clouds at the close 
of the season of protracted draught. A certain combination of the triple 
potency representing respectively the principles of existence, consciousness and 
bliss, appears to be disposed in an indivisibly oblique manner about the Beauty 
of Divinity. His Twin Eyes, focusing all the supremely jubilant brightness of 
the realm of perfect living consciousness, set forth the Beauty of His 
incomparable Figure. In the material world those Eyes may be found reflected in 
the beauty of the fresh-blown lotus. On the Head of Godhead’s Own Divine 
Form, there is observed a certain distinctive feature similar to which there is to 
be found nothing at all in all our previous experience. All that can be said is that 



the tail of the peacock is probably the reflection in this world of this 
inexpressible peculiarity. A certain garland of flowers that have the easy 
perfection of the soul, sets forth the beauty of the incomparable Neck of Sree 
Krishna. The beauty of the natural flowers of the forest seems to be a reflection 
of this particular feature. The Waist of Sree Krishna is encompassed by 
knowledge that is manifested by the spiritual cognitive principle representing the 
energy of the soul. It seems that the flash of lightning, skirting the fringe of a 
massive assemblage of fresh, rain-bearing clouds reflects the beauty of the girdle 
round the Waist of Sree Krishna. The kaustubha and other precious gems 
and ornaments appertaining to the soul disseminate the beauty of the Person of 
Sree Krishna. The spiritual agency by whose means the ravishing call, that 
has power to draw the soul, manifests itself, is observed in the figure of a flute. 
The flutes and other instruments of this world that serve to carry the musical 
notes of every variety may be the reflection of the Divine Flute. The 
inconceivable Figure of Sree Krishna is observed to be placed under the 
Kadamba tree, embodying spiritual horripilation, on the grassy woodlands 
sloping to the water’s edge of the Yamuna of the liquid spiritual essence. It is by 
means of these spiritual symbols that the beloved Son of Nanda, Sree Krishna, 
Lord of the spiritual Realm, makes His Appearance to the view of the 
Vaishnavas in their exclusive state (samadhi) 

But persons who are unfortunately blinded by empiric knowledge are unable to 
find the Form and distinctive concrete aspects of the spiritual existence even 
when the realm of the Absolute is actually brought before their eyes in the 
exclusive state. 

Sree Krishnachandra, in this manner, is realised, in the exclusive state, as 
maddening the realm of pure souls by the strains of His Flute and attracting the 
minds of the milkmaids (gopees). How may those who are infatuated by 
the vanities of high lineage, etc., attain to Krishna? Persons who are free from 
all worldly vanities are alone eligible for being attracted by Krishna. Those 
who understand the nature of spiritual existence, know that sadhus fall into 
two clearly defined groups, viz., (1) those who have attained to the state of 
the gopees, and (2) those who follow in the footsteps of such self-realised souls. 

The former are called siddhas and the latter sadhakas. 


The graduated process of spiritual endeavour of those persons who have realised 
the state of gopees, is as follows. In the course of their sojourn in this world, the 



music of Krishna’s Flute enters the ear of a few exceptionally fortunate persons. 
The sweetness of the music exercising its attraction on such persons makes them 
fit for the highest spiritual status. This quickly dissipates their male disposition 
which prompts people of this world to seek for their own sensuous enjoyment. 

On the complete disappearance of the male disposition there is aroused another 
temperament characterized by a spontaneous preference for following the 
guidance of those who are possessed of the mellow quality of spiritual 
consorthood. In this position the femininity of the soul in the form of capacity 
for ministering to the enjoyment of Godhead, manifests itself. The expectation of 
consorthood becomes so strong that the soul under its influence develops all the 
external symptoms of the state of madness. 

The first experience arises in the form of hearing about the specific Figure 
(Rupa) of Krishna. This process falls into two parts. The first of these is of the 
nature of spontaneous realisation of Krishna’s attraction in the sphere of one’s 
ordinary cognitive activity. This event is called the hearing of the music of 
Krishna’s Flute. This is followed by the hankering for listening to the narrative 
regarding Krishna from those who have had an actual sight. This form of 
listening to the Scriptural narratives of Krishna from the lips of sadhus, also 
comes under this head. 

The realisation of Krishna that is attainable by such hearing and study, forms the 
division of spiritual endeavour which is called "listening to the Quality of 
Krishna”: The next is seeing the delineation of Krishna as in a picture. This is 
effected by the realisation of the Purpose and Supreme Skill of Krishna in the 
design of this material world. He who has been enabled to realise that the 
material world is the distorted perverted reflection of the realm of the Absolute, 
is said to have had a sight of Krishna as in a picture. In other words, the 
preliminary stages of the state of devotion to Vishnu, or Vaishnavata, accrues in 
the three different ways of spontaneous realisation of its desirability, realisation 
of the nature of Divine worship by the study of the Scriptures, and actual 
personal experience of the Nature of Godhead from a consideration of the 
wonderful organization of the material Universe Unadulterated faith in Krishna 
as the source of the loving devotion of Braja is the preliminary stage in the 
gradual appearance of the process of spiritual love. The appearance of this form 
of unalloyed faith is followed by attainment of close association with the sadhus, 
who are denizens of spiritual Braja. Such association is the cause of the 
attainment of Krishna. Those persons who have the rare fortune of gaining the 
companionship of sadhus in course of their further progress on the path of 



spiritual endeavour, which is comparable to the stealthy approach of the 
sweetheart to the secret place of meeting with her lover, may perchance realise, 
at some rare moment, their auspicious meeting with the Supreme Object of their 
love on the water’s edge of the Yamuna, the stream of the liquid essence of the 
pure soul. 

By meeting with Krishna, the transcendental bliss of Divine communion 
(parananda) ensues which at once causes all worldly felicity 
previously experienced to appear as infinitesimally trivial in comparison. The 
supreme bliss grows apace in the heart, as the days pass, towards the most dearly 
loved ever-new Form of the Soul of all souls. The root of spiritual love is 
that attachment of the individual soul who is constituted of the principles of 
pure cognition and bliss, towards the concentrated Divine Form of All-existence, 
Allcognition and All-bliss, which is perfect in itself and natural for the soul. 

This attachment (rati) under the favouring impulse of the principle of 
mellowness (rasa) undergoes development by taking on the form of rasa. 

Rasa is of twelve kinds. The five rasas of santa (equanimity), dasya (service), 
sakhya (friendship), batsalya (parental affection) and madhura (consorthood), 
are the five primary varieties. These five are of the nature of substantive 
relationship. Beera (heroic), karuna (tender), raudra (keen), hasya (laughter), 
bhayanaka (terrible), bibhatsa (abnormal) and adbhuta (wonderful), are the 
seven secondary rasas. These arise spontaneously from the establishment of 
relationship. Prior to the establishment of actual relationship there is no 
possibility of external manifestation of attachment. These specific visible 
manifestations are all secondary rasas. 

Even after attachment (rati) has assumed the form of rasa (liquid mellowness), it 
does not attain to its full resplendence except in combination with the four 
samagris (ingredients), viz., (a) bibhaba (particular state), (b) anubhaba 
(perception), (c) sattvika (natural indication of emotion), and (d) byabhichari 
(transitory feeling), (a) Bibhaba is of two kinds, viz., (1) alambana (cause); and 
(2) uddipana (aggravating agent). Alambana is again of two kinds, viz., (1) 
Krishna, and (2) devotee of Krishna. The good qualities and distinctive natures 
of Krishna and His devotees constitute the division of uddipana (i.e., excitant of 
attachment or rati), (b) Anubhaba is of three kinds, viz., (1) alankara, (2) 
udbhasvara, and (3) vachika.. Alankara, such as hava, bhava, etc., in all twenty 
in number, has been classified into the three divisions of (1) angaja (of the 



body), (2) ayatna ja (spontaneous), and (3) swabhabaja (of the individual nature 
of a person). Sighing, dancing, rolling on the ground and such other activities are 
called udbhasvara.. Alapa, bilapa, etc., are the twelve vachika anubhavas. 
Stupefaction, sweating, etc., are the eight sattvika bikaras. Nirveda, etc., are the 
thirty-three byabhichari bhavas. The rasa and all its ingredients (samagri) have 
a constant bearing on the development of rati till it reaches the stage of 
mahabhava.. 

The attachment (rati) for Krislma is sthayibhava (the permanent state) or the 
rasa (mellow liquid principle) of bhakti (devotion). In conditioned souls the 
principle manifests itself as bhakti or service. In the free state it appears as the 
principle of love in the realm of the Absolute (Vaikuntha). Attachment 
for Krishna develops up to the stage of mahabhava. The process of development 
by the methods of identification with primary and secondary rasas and by the 
help of ingredients enriching the variety of its manifestations, constitutes the 
eternal treasure of the soul in her state of perfect spiritual freedom. It is this 
which is also the object of endeavour of the conditioned souls. If it be urged that 
there is no necessity for any attempt to attain that which is eternally inherent in 
the soul, the answer is that the resuscitation of the eternal principle in 
the conditioned state is the process of the spiritual endeavours of the 
conditioned neophyte. 

It has been realised in their natural exclusive state by great souls such as Sree 
Vyasadeva, etc., and also by our Gurus that attachment (rati) for Krishna is the 
most wholesome principle of the realised essence of the jeeva-soul. The nature 
of the substantive reality is in a slight measure manifested in its reflected image. 
It is for this reason that the principle of attraction between male and female in 
this world has proved to be the most charming of all mundane entities. But the 
attachment between male and female of this world is utterly insignificant and 
condemnable in comparison with the principle of the transcendental reality. This 
is indicated by the passage in the narrative of the circular dance in the 
Bhagavatam, "He who listens to or recites to others, with due reverence and 
faith, these Pastimes of Vishnu with the damsels of Braja, attains to the state of 
transcendental devotion for Godhead resulting in the simultaneous and speedy 
disappearance from his heart of the malady of mundane lust". It is, as if, the 
mirage of the desert is replaced by the shining water of the magnificent lake 
offering the sorely-needed cooling drink to the thirsty traveler led astray by the 
deceptive image of the life-giving liquid. I have described the limit of the love 
and activity of the eternally self-realised souls towards the eternally realised 



Personality of Sree Krishna. The limit of attachment is mahabhava, the limit of 
activity is maha-rasa. This is also the limit of vocabulary sprung from the 
material principle. That which lies beyond should be seen by means of the 
exclusive state (samadhi). 

It is the only thing needful to be imbued with serving love for Sree Krishna, of 
the perfectly pure kind. It is the nature of genuine serving spiritual love to be 
absolutely free from all worldly dross. A person, in whom this pure impulse 
manifests itself, is thereby rendered perfectly pure in every detail of his conduct. 
Such a person is naturally disinclined to ungodly conduct, all his affinities 
having undergone a complete change of objective from the mundane to the 
Absolute. But it is necessary to bear in mind that before concluding any conduct 
to be blamable, the status of the person displaying such conduct should be 
considered. This is the most material point. No conduct is universally good or 
bad. If the attempt be made to arrive at a uniform body of rules of conduct which 
are to be binding on all, such a procedure is sure to end in futile speculations and 
to frustrate all real endeavour for ethical improvement. This is the great 
disservice that has been done to man by speculative ethics. It has only served to 
blunt the edge of natural goodness of judgment by entangling it in the meshes of 
specious theories that are bound to be wholly wide of the mark. It is, therefore, 
the first and foremost duty of every individual who is sincerely anxious of not 
being deceived by the shadow, to avoid all barren speculative discussions, on 
principle. 

There is also another pitfall which is avoided by a person who is really inspired 
by love for the substantive Truth and the desire for serving Him for the sake of 
promoting His pleasure. Such a person never engages in sectarian hairsplitting. 
He is found to maintain a discreet attitude towards sectarian disputes and in 
respect of external symbols which differ in different communities. These issues, 
as a matter of fact, derive all their value from the purpose which they 
are instituted to serve. Their external face need, therefore, be neither 
undervalued nor overestimated. The conduct of the devotee who is actuated by 
natural love for the service of the Absolute, in these matters, should not, 
therefore, be misunderstood. Such a person is neither opposed to, nor is he a 
supporter of these external features as such. 

Those who are servants of Hari know very well that no work is worth doing 
which does not please Hari; neither is knowledge, by which attachment to Hari is 
not engendered, of any value. Persons who are possessed of this truly rational 



insight always engage themselves in activities that are promotive of spiritual 
progress and desist from every form of activity which has anything else than 
Hari as its objective. This consideration regulates the minutest detail of 
the activities of the servants of Hari. They are not deflected from this course by 
the breadth of an hair in life or in death, so constant is the loyalty of their 
judgment and so utterly incapable of being overclouded by any extraneous 
consideration. They are always possessed of unerring judgment, are full of the 
natural humility of the pure soul and are constantly engaged in doing good to 
all entities that exist. 

They know truly that the soul is the only pure essence, that mind is a product of 
the principle of inertia and that the gross physical body is a thing of the earth. 
They are also well aware that the jiva (the individual soul) is the eternal servant 
of Godhead whose spiritual function is of the nature of spontaneous liking for 
the service of Krishna; that he is endowed with the aptitude for his natural 
function of loving service even while he may be resident in this material world. 
Possessing the true knowledge of all this, persons, who are endowed with the 
spiritual disposition that is found on the plane of Braja, realising in their souls 
absolute freedom from all stultifying influences of this phenomenal world, are 
constantly engaged in the service of Krishna, the concentrated Personal 
Embodiment of All-existence, All-cognition and Allbliss. This worship is 
performed spontaneously in the exclusive state proper by the soul disengaged 
from all mundane affinities. 

It is when the impulse of love cannot be compassed by the pure spiritual essence 
of the soul on account of its triumphant growth that it overflows its natural 
bounds into the subtle mental body in which it manifests itself in a mixed form. 
This gives rise to the mental worship consisting of the processes of manana 
(resolution of service), smarana (recollection), dhyana (meditation), dharana 
(retention, assimilation)’ the thought of bhutasuddhi (purification of the material 
cases), etc. This mental worship need not be avoided on the ground that it is of a 
mixed nature. This is inevitable till the dissolution of the material cases 
themselves. But the process that extends to the mind and body from the soul 
should be distinguished from the apparently similar process reached by mundane 
sensuous speculation by its ascending effort. This latter is idolatry proper and is 
categorically different from the mixed spiritual process. 

These mental activities, derived from the soul, on undergoing still further 
expansion, overflow into the gross physical body. Coming down to the tip of the 



tongue it expresses itself as utterance of the chant of the Name, Quality, etc., of 
Godhead. Attaining the proximity of the ear it brings about the hearing of the 
same. To the eye it imparts the impulse of the vision of the Beauty and Figure of 
Godhead. The pure spiritual moods of the soul overflow into the bodily 
expressions of horripilation, shedding of tears, shivering, dancing, prostrations 
by way of obeisance, rolling on the bare ground, acts of loving embrace, journey 
to the holy tirthas connected with the Doings of Godhead, etc. This overflowing 
of the spiritual principle into material activity, is inconceivable in its nature and 
is the manifestation of the causeless mercy of the Divinity intended to bring 
about the turning of the direction of mundane activity Godward. The institution 
of honouring of mahaprasadam has been ordained by the Scriptures to bring 
about the change of the activity of indulging in the pleasures of the table in the 
direction of the service of Godhead. This argument holds also in the case of 
other spiritual injunctions. This is the true significance of every ritual. 

It is not to be supposed that persons who have realised the true nature of the 
spiritual function, neglect the due performance of worldly activities that are 
inspired by the mundane purpose. What the perfectly enlightened soul does is 
this: she maintains internally the attitude of unconditional 
feminine submissiveness towards Sree Krishna, while displaying the face of a 
heroic masculinity in her external conduct towards persons and duties of this 
world. Externally the pure devotee is found to be the most heroic among 
ambitious workers, a male prepared to exercise all the prerogatives of his 
superior sex among females, profoundly experienced in dealing with society, a 
good teacher of boys, the greatest of those who possess the knowledge of our 
material needs, but is withal skilled in turning them to the account of the 
summum bonum, the peace-maker in war and the purifier of the hearts of sinners. 
All this is found to co-exist with an opposite disposition, which is the outcome 
of excessive increase of the impulse of spiritual love, which leads the devotee to 
be averse to seeking popularity and to prefer the intimate service of his Beloved 
in the seclusion of retirement from this world. 

The points that are emphatically brought out by the considerations penned 
above, are that it is not possible to serve Sree Krishna except under the direction, 
or, what is strictly identical with the same, by association in the service, of pure 
devotees who alone are in a position to distinguish the chaff from the grain. As 
soon as the least point of real contact with the pure devotees is established by the 
causeless grace of the latter, the fortunate recipient of such priceless favour is 
thereby endowed with the faculty that can distinguish the essential from the non- 



essential. The pure devotee is always accustomed to overlook all external defects 
and accept only the inner significance of every occurrence. This, of course, does 
not mean that one should continue to commit offenses in the expectation of such 
indulgence. The deliberate offender cannot obtain the real mercy of the pure 
devotee by reason of such offense. It is obligatory to follow the conduct of the 
perfectly blameless servants of Sree Krishna if one is to realise the nature of 
their unbounded mercy. If the hand of the observer is placed over his eye it is 
bound to prevent his receiving the light of the glorious luminary, who is never 
chary of pouring out, unasked and in unstinted profusion and without the least 
reservation, his light and warmth towards everything. 

Critics who are so unfortunate as to be disposed to stop their ear-holes against 
the expostulations of self-realised souls and persist in looking at 
the transcendental, perfectly purifying Pastimes of Sree Krishna through 
the spectacles of their own malicious sensuous dispositions, are no wiser than 
the person who does not spare to criticize the Sun and to blame that luminary 
for withholding his light from one who is determined to keep his hand 
tightly placed over his eyes. It is necessary to learn how to behave towards the 
Truth if one is to make His acquaintance at all. Malicious misrepresentations and 
willful misunderstandings cannot enable so-called critics to be enlightened about 
the nature of the Truth nor to enlighten others regarding Him. I desire no 
other boon than that of being sincerely disposed to make my complete 
submission to the pure devotees of Sree Krishna for the sole reward of their 
approval. I am confident of attaining to the sight of the Truth by following the 
method which precludes all other desires than that of the causeless and exclusive 
service of all the servants of the Absolute Truth. May the pure devotees pardon 
the innumerable lapses of my aspiring attempt to follow in their holy footsteps 
in all humility. 



4 Comparative Study Of Religion 

Empiric History is a narrative of events occurring in time and is, therefore, 
necessarily limited by ascertained chronology. The ascertainment of 
the chronological order of events has suggested and supplied the materials for 
a science of growth or evolution deduced from the chronological sequence 
of actual occurrences. Attempts have been made to apply the method 
of chronological evolutionary treatment, in the face of oblivious difficulties, to 
the subject of religion by a growing number of learned scholars resulting in 
an apparently surprising degree of unanimity as regards the conclusions reached. 

It is necessary at the outset of theistic history to attempt a valuation of the 
speculations with reference to the worship of Sree Sree Radha-Krishna to 
bring them into line with the Absolute Truth. The wide gap that separates 
the worship of Sree Sree Radha-Krishna from the conclusions of empiric 
religion requires to be explained in a systematic manner in the light of 
transcendental history which is not limited by any limited chronology to a 
limited world. 

Sree Sree Radha-Krishna is the eternally coupled Divine Pair, Sree Radha being 
the predominated, and Sree Krishna the predominating aspect, 
indissolubly joined together, of the complete, active, Absolute Personality. 
Radha-Krishna or the Absolute is thus a composite of two persons of whom One 
predominates over the other. Neither of them is a Person of any exclusive or 
limited sense. The Personality of the Divinity in either aspect is Absolute and, 
therefore, also, All-inclusive. The impersonal view gives a partial and, therefore, 
misleading aspect of the Absolute. Hastiness of judgment due to inherent defect 
of understanding is responsible for mistaking the impersonal view as 
being superior to that of Divine Personality. The Personality of the Absolute 
should not also, on the other hand, be gratuitously confounded with the 
personality of our defective empiric speculations, in which the truth is obscured 
by the predominance of limiting, delusive, material reservations. Radha is not 
the female of our perceptual or conceptual experience derived from 
the observations of the phenomenal world by means of defective senses. 

The Absolute can be neither male nor female of our experience for the 
simple reason that such male or female can be but one of a number of 
mutually exclusive entities and cannot, therefore, accommodate the rest of them. 
It is the intention to avoid this difficulty arising from the defective nature of our 



sense-experience that has led the empiric philosophers to hit upon the barren 
and logically untenable notion of impersonality to indicate the nature of 
the Absolute. This has only landed them in far worse difficulties. 

The whole issue hinges on a right understanding of the nature of the Absolute. 

If God were really a zero we could be saved the trouble of attempting to describe 
His nature. If God is not zero, He should logically be both everything and no 
particular thing, at one and the same time. Everything is in Radha-Krishna; but 
Radha-Krishna is not identical with anything except Themselves. 

In other words Radha-Krishna has a specific individual existence of Their own, 
simultaneously with Their external all-pervasive existence. The external 
entities in their individual aspect, are not constituent parts of Radha-Krishna as 
the Absolute cannot be made up of a number of particulars nor even of 
the aggregates of individual entities. As a matter of fact individual entities as 
well as their aggregations are manifestations of Sree Krishna in and by the 
plenary Divine Power Sree Radhika. The manifestations are neither outside, 
nor identical with their Source. 

The question how Sree Radhika can accommodate the material universe or other 
persons partially similar to Herself occurs naturally enough to the speculative 
mind whose activities are confined within the limits of three dimensions But it 
would be sheer dogmatism and perfectly illogical to try to squeeze the Absolute 
within the narrow mental scope for the reason that the mind is incapable of 
conceiving existences of more than three dimensions or of less than one. 

There cannot be such a thing as a comparative estimate of different creeds 
without postulation of a standard of value. It is, of course, possible to find 
out the values of the different creeds in terms of one of them. Let us suppose 
that this is done with every one of the creeds by turn with conscientious 
impartiality and sound judgment. Will it take us nearer the Absolute? Certainly 
not. The Absolute could be approached only by means of the Absolute. If none 
of these creeds be of the nature of the Absolute, the permutation and 
combination of any number of relative entities can never yield any knowledge of 
the Absolute. The method that should be applied is that of assigning local values 
to the fractional parts by relating them to the Integer. Those who adopt the 
moral principle as the standard by which to judge the local value of a creed, seek 
to arrange the creeds in an order of moral superiority. As an instance, we may 



take the methods of Dr. R. G. Bhandarkar, Barth and their followers. They try 
to evaluate the worship of Sree Sree Radha-Krishna by the moral standard. 

They consider the worship of Rama and Sita as superior being more moral than 
the worship of Sree Sree Radha-Krishna. Such estimations assume the 
absolute validity of the ill-defined moral standard of empiric thinkers. Those 
extremely well informed writers could not have been wholly unaware of this 
radical philosophical weakness of their standard of value in arriving at any 
really dependable conclusion in regard to the relative worth of the different 
creeds. 

Idolatry is the proper logical denial of the worship of the Absolute. Idolatry is 
the result of despair to find out the real truth. When the empiricist finds 
it impossible to discover the Absolute by means of his abortive speculations, 
but is anxious to provide a working hypothesis for good conduct, he dresses up 
his known erroneous idea to do duty as the spurious substitute of 
the inconceivable Absolute. 

The moral principle cannot be clearly defined by those very persons who do not 
scruple to proclaim it as the only safe test for the valuation of religions. Such 
a method amounts really to nothing higher than a perverse advocacy of 
a particular whim. The conclusions thus reached are also never claimed to 
be unchangeable or absolute. The tentative and inconclusive nature of 
the performance is held to be part and parcel of the law emanating from 
the conscious will of a Person possessing the supreme power and governing 
the cosmic evolution. This establishes the validity of the principle by shifting 
the responsibility by way of self-contradiction to the shoulders of the 
Absolute Himself. The irrational acquiescence of despairing individuals provides 
its other sanction. As a matter of fact the method which is the fabrication of a 
particular fallible human mind is confidently offered for the convinced tentative 
(?) acceptance of all human minds on grounds indicated above. Morality is 
nothing but an empiric fiction leading to no definite goal. It makes its votary 
move perpetually in a vicious circle impelled by the desire to discover 
rational support for the conduct of the average man after performance, on 
grounds of expediency. Expediency is not, however, the acceptance of but the 
refusal to accept, any definable principle of general conduct. 

But the aspirations of the physical body and mind refuse to be satisfied even by 
being allowed a free scope which cannot be realised in practice. The 
moral philosopher ignores this ugly circumstance and makes a show of 



sticking heroically to the worship of his idol which cannot save him from 
constant and irremediable transgressions against itself! If this is not appreciated 
by the victim, he is charged with the unpardonable crime of pessimism on-the, 
ground that it is our moral (?) duty to try to make the best of a bad job. But are 
we sure that the job is really bad and that it has not been made so by our 
bungling and hypocritical method of approaching it? 

The worship of Sree Sree Radha-Krishna is condemned by certain empiric 
moralists because it seems to them to idolize promiscuous sexuality. But 
is promiscuous sexuality really undesirable? Is it undesirable for the reason that 
it is likely to prevent the realisation of the maximum sensual and other 
pleasures derivable from regulated sexual act? Who is to be the judge? If the 
attainment of the maximum pleasure by the individual be the desirable object, 
has promiscuity been really proved to be incompatible with such object? 

The ethical repugnance to promiscuity after all amounts to nothing more 
serious than this that it is not in conformity with the status quo, and not that it 
may not be made the status quo with proper and reasonable safeguards. 

The empiric moral idea is no higher than the above. Lest my monopoly of 
enjoyment of a particular male or female, whom I choose to like for the 
time being, be jeopardized I become an advocate of monogamy (with or 
without divorce?) and worshipper of Rama-Sita. If sexuality is bad, how can 
even monogamy be good? If promiscuity is bad in itself, how can monogamy 
be good in itself? By what test is goodness or badness itself to be determined? 

It has never been possible for aspirations of the flesh endowed with a 
pseudoconscious form by the mild to satisfy the genuine demands of our reason. 

All speculations of the mind are inconclusive and erroneous. The moral notion 
is, indeed, only one of those inexplicable entities that demand to be 
explained. Those who erroneously think that the worship of Sree Sree Radha- 
Krishna is immoral forget that no mental speculation has any access to the 
Absolute Who is the Object of worship in this case. 

What consolation does a mentalist expect by worshipping Rama-Sita? Is he, 
thereby, likely to be encouraged in cultivating his monogamous nuptial relations 
with assiduity ? Can such a conclusion be regarded as logically tenable. If God 
happens to be monogamous, am I likely to become so, by contemplating His 
conduct? Can also the very notion of monogamy or marriage apply to the 
Absolute? We may not want to be promiscuous for absence of unlimited sexual 



and other powers. It is only a counsel of possible discomfort. Why should we 
suppose that God’s power is limited by any adverse condition, The attempt to 
judge the Absolute by a limiting standard set up by ourselves for our regulation 
is opposed to the notion of the Absolute. The Absolute is located beyond the 
scope of our mental activity. The phenomenal world exposed to the view of our 
senses is only an abrupt and unintelligible section of the whole Truth. We stand 
powerless in the presence of the Infinity of Smallness and the Infinity of 
Greatness that spread at either end beyond this limited span of the visible world 
and refuse to show themselves to us. This is the tantalizing condition of the 
existence of three dimensions into which we find ourselves securely imprisoned. 
If any merciful being tries to communicate the tidings of the Absolute to us, he is 
bound to fail completely unless he is also capable of imparting to us the 
necessary receptive faculty. This is the position of the Agnostics to a certain 
extent, as they are conscious of their limitations and are accordingly unprepared 
to commit themselves to any opinions, favourable or unfavourable, regarding the 
Absolute. It is a more consistent attitude than the self-sufficiency of Barth or 
Bhandarkar. 

The Skeptics disbelieve the possibility of the Absolute taking the initiative and 
communicating Himself to us in a way that is beyond the comprehension of 
our present limited faculties. The Skeptics, therefore, want to sit still in 
sheer despair. The Atheists, indeed, speak only the language of delirium when 
they positively deny the existence of the Absolute. They do not deny the fact 
of relative existence or relative knowledge. How can they, therefore, 
consistently refuse to admit the logical necessity of absolute existence and 
absolute knowledge? Error can have, rationally speaking, no absolute existence 
and even its seeming existence can only be a reflection of an absolute 
existence erroneously apprehended by, our defective cognitive faculty. 

Atheism represents at its very best only the crude cogitations of the 
undeveloped intellect regarding the Inconceivable. 

As a matter of fact the worship of Sree Sree Radha-Krishna or of Rama-Sita, if 
they are regarded as historical entities located on the-mundane plane, is 
rightly liable to the charge of anthropomorphism. By the mere assertion that a 
form of such anthropomorphic worship is moral, its absolute nature is only 
still further ignored. Those who choose unnecessarily to get engrossed in 
the manipulation of relative speculation regarding the Absolute and declare it 
as the only method of approach to the Absolute, owe a cautious hearing to 
any one who does not muddle the real nature of the issue. 



Almost the first thing that requires to be settled clearly and at the outset of any 
so-called historical inquiry regarding religion, is whether the object of our quest 
is, indeed, the Absolute. Those who are not prepared to admit that religion 
should be identical with the quest of the Absolute, have an undoubted right of 
criticizing the conclusions of those who accept the religion of the Absolute. This 
is what the empiric thinkers have been indefatigable in doing all along. But is it 
irrelevant to opine that empiric criticism is bound to be altogether wide of the 
mark in such a case for the reason that the attempt to judge of the Absolute, or of 
what is even claimed as the Absolute, is, by the fact of this very reservation, 
removed wholly outside its self-admitted jurisdiction ? 

The Absolutists rest their case on the fact that the Absolute can and does 
communicate Himself by imparting to us the capacity of receiving Him. They go 
further and assert that we are already eternally endowed by the Absolute with 
such faculty, but are free to wilfully neglect to make the proper use of the same. 
That the Absolute is, nevertheless, trying continuously to persuade us to be 
willing to know Him by making the proper use of those faculties. These are the 
fundamentals of every religion. 

The Absolute is always speaking to us regarding Himself and we are always 
deliberately shutting our ears to His Voice. The Absolute has been 
eternally appearing to us in the Form of the Spiritual Scriptures as the testament 
of His utterances. He is also sending down His agents in the human form to 
speak to us with the human voice to make the same perceptible even to, our 
sealed ears. All this is super-rational. The agents of the Absolute appear among 
us in order to make the meaning of the spiritual Scriptures perceptible to our 
dormant understanding. The Scriptures require to be interpreted to us by those 
who know. 

Those who are not prepared on principle to listen to the voice of the Absolute, 
need not decide that it is not the voice of the Absolute, before giving it 
their impartial and full hearing. Of course there is every risk of wasting our time 
on scoundrels personating as agents of the Absolute bv dint of their 
sheer impudence. It should not, however, take much time or trouble for an 
honest enquirer to find these out. It is always possible to find the right teacher of 
the Absolute, provided one really wants to find him. The agent of the 
Absolute must also be eternally existent in the available form to all who want to 
find him at all. 



Very few of us really want to find the teacher of the Absolute even if we know 
that it is easy to find him. Most of us have no interest for the Absolute. This 
is partly due to our traditional wrong conception regarding the nature of 
the Absolute. It is our purpose in this chapter to try to invite the attention of 
the reader to certain widely prevalent misconceptions regarding the nature of 
the Absolute, by an examination of the extent of their deviation from the 
absolute standard. 

The creeds that prevail n the world are divided naturally into two exclusive 
groups according as they happen to follow the method of empiric search of the 
Absolute or that of revelation. The empiric creeds may be broadly grouped into 
four divisions, viz., (1) Theism, (2) Agnosticism and Skepticism, (3) Pantheism, 
and (4) Undifferentiated Monism. The revealed religions show the following 
order of evolution, viz., (1) worship of Godhead realised as a male Person 
(Vasudeva), (2) as Couple (Lakshmi-Narayana, Rama-Sita), (3) as served by 
many married consorts (Dwarakesha Krishna), and (4) as served spontaneously 
by many consorts who follow no conventional matrimonial regulation in the 
coupled form of Sree Sree Radha-Krishna. 

The instinct of the service of the Absolute is innate in human nature. It is, 
however, ordinarily overlaid with the negative dominating impulse of 
selfgratification. According as the one or the other impulse proves stronger, a 
man makes his choice as between the two broad divisions of religion. A person 
who has full confidence in his own powers in attaining the Truth, follows 
the empiric method. One who is convinced of the utter inadequacy of the 
human intellect to find the Truth, is inclined to follow the method of revelation. 

The empiricist worships (?) the mixed product resulting from his actual sensuous 
experience. The word experience, as used in connection with empiricism, should 
be understood as referring exclusively to knowledge of the external world 
derived through the process of sense-perception. Sense-perception is the material 
or limiting condition of all mental process. The mind is the meeting-ground of 
the principle of animation with the inanimate material principle supplied by the 
senses. Mental activities. The reaction of the animate principle on the inanimate. 
It is a composite of two apparent incompatibles. No mental activity is possible 
unless both principles are present. The principle of animation is mixed up with 
or overlaid by that of inanimation, in the mental function. 


It follows that empiric worship is bound to be either acceptance or rejection of 



the material principle, in one or more of its aspects. In this case the mind is 
the accepting or rejecting agent. The mind cannot function except by way 
of acceptance or rejection of materials supplied by the senses. But the 
mind cannot cease to function. It must either accept or reject and must also 
continue to do so alternately. It cannot accept or reject for good. That would 
tantamount to its own destruction. 

Atheism represents the temporary rejecting function of alternatives by the mind. 
The mind refuses to accept as true or desirable, because the two are really 
identical in this case, any stationary condition, for the reason that it is afraid that 
it would be suicidal. Atheism wants to live on the state of ever-changing activity. 
It is the proper negation of the Absolute conceived as Inaction. It is justified in 
disbelieving the Absolute by the evidence of its actual sense-experience. But it 
should by parity of reason be equally prepared to extend the bounds of its 
experience by any and every method. This, however, it is not always prepared to 
do. For instance, it refuses to accept the method of submission to the Truth for 
His realisation as enjoined by the revealed Scriptures. Atheism is thus proved to 
be an exclusive partisan of the method of empiric self-sufficiency in spite of its 
profession of. freedom from all bias to creed and dogma. Its sterility is due to 
this hypocritical reservation. Its exclusive attachment to self gratification is the 
cause of its disinclination to seek for the Truth and its consequent failure to find 
Him. 

Agnosticism and Skepticism deny the existence of possibility of the Knowledge 
of the Absolute. Both do so on the strength of their limited experience 
and without due consideration of the method proposed by the Scriptures. Both 
have an attitude of disbelief towards the method of revelation by their 
overconfidence in their own conclusions. This is really self-contradictory as 
neither professes to be able to know the Truth. The Skeptic is the greater sinner 
of the two, because he is not even prepared to admit the very existence of 
the Absolute. Both really depend on the method of narrow dogmatism in their 
own cases although appearing to condemn the attitude in the case of others. 

The explanation of this irrational attitude is to be sought, as in the case of 
atheists, in undue attachment to the prospects of this transitory world which is 
father to the thought that it would be heroic not to seek to fly from the state 
of ignorance and misery which is supposed by them to be unavoidable. 

The argument that is used by the theists is that ignorance and misery is due to 
the self-elected folly of the votaries of worldly vanities whose position 
is psychologically unsound and is also opposed to the moral principle. It is 



the Nihilistic attitude that becomes the worst of nuisances if it be allowed to 
pass itself off as a constructive ideal. 

The pantheistic attitude is the most treacherous of all as it wears the mask of 
theism although in principle it is identical with atheism. The pantheists 
profess to see God in phenomenal Nature. This is the concrete denial of the 
Absolute. The theists do not counsel the worship of the limited and transitory. 
The pantheists affect to find no difference between this world and the 
spiritual realm. The pantheistic school appears in a variety of forms in this 
world. The most common group being that which bears the name of Smartas in 
India. The Smartas hold that the object of all worship enjoined by the Scriptures, 
is the improvement of our worldly felicity, present and prospective. The view 
finds its psychological support in the current literatures of the world which are 
busy in vindicating the ways of the world. What the atheist is really afraid of, is 
that he might be called upon to modify his worldly activities out of deference to 
any transcendental consideration which in his opinion cannot possess any 
present worldly value and may merely and falsely deprive him of a present 
felicity. This is met by the pantheist with the assurance that the transcendental 
would be of no use if it did not serve the plans of the worldling better than 
otherwise. The pantheist, however, cannot really adduce sufficient rational 
grounds for his contention except the testimony of experience of following the 
performance, in blind faith, of the ceremonials laid down in the Shastras. The 
pantheists are, therefore, more grossly worldly minded than even the professed 
atheists. They are often confounded with the genuine theists with whom they 
have nothing in common except their externals to a certain extent. The 
pantheists, themselves, however, oppose the bona fide theists tooth and nail in 
the matter of the proper interpretation of the Scriptures. It may be well to 
mention in this connection that the Scriptures do contain a large body of 
injunctions the performers of which are promised the reward of increased 
worldly felicity. There are also text books that are specially devoted to the 
vindication and glorification of the worldly point of view. The reason of this, 
according to theistic interpreters, is that the Scriptures want to produce faith in 
the transcendental even in those who value nothing but worldliness. These 
worldlings are, therefore, promised what they want wrongly, on condition that 
they should submit to certain regulations. These regulations have been so framed 
as to serve the purpose of moderating their passion for present worldly 
enjoyment by promoting the attitude of reflection towards the past and future. 


Karma or worldly activity is the starting point of all pantheistic thought. It has 



been analyzed in all its bearings in special treatises of the Scriptures. 

Those treatises do not purposely go beyond the limit of the phenomenal world 
in those discourses, which are intended exclusively for the edification of 
those who are incapable of believing in anything higher than worldly activity. 

But any impartial examination of the subject is bound to lead to a clearer 
apprehension of the defects as well as the merits of the view that worldly activity 
can supply all our needs. 

It is not my intention to suggest that whatever is contained in the section ,of the 
Scriptures dealing with rituals is necessarily true even from the worldly point of 
view. The Smartas, indeed, hold that the rituals if properly performed, are really 
efficacious. This may or may not be so. The Shastras contain numerous 
statements to the effect that the promise of worldly reward, is meant to induce 
persons with a childish judgment to be moderate in the matter of their sensuous 
enjoyment. This may mean that the spiritual object is alone true while every 
other prospect is fleeting and illusory. But the fleeting and illusory result itself is 
valued by worldlings above every other thing. Whether the proper performance 
of the rituals also actually yields the worldly results promised by the Scriptures, 
is not relevant for our present purpose and the matter may, therefore, be left open 
for those who want to speculate about it. This last is what the Smartas and their 
school have been indefatigable in doing all over the world. These empiricists 
have also produced a Science of Theology which is wide of the mark for the 
spiritual purpose, although it may be more intelligible to and at the same time be 
fully exposed to the attacks, of other sections of empiric thinkers. 

The pantheists are worshippers of mundane objects possessing definite material 
form and quantity. For this reason they are condemned as idolaters by those who 
prefer more refined and intellectual forms of worship. It is, 
however, philosophically impossible to draw any, line between one form of 
empiric worship and another. All empiric schools ultimately depend on one's 
individual judgment for the ascertainment of Truth. It has been shown above that 
the stuff of all such judgment is sense-perception which is thus the common 
object of worship in a gross or refined form of all empiric worshippers. 

The pantheists are led by their particular predilection to appreciate the objects 
and relationships of this phenomenal world for their own sake in the light 
of their empiric judgment. They are not prepared to admit the possibility of 
the uselessness of such a quest not directed to a higher purpose. In other 
words, they confound matter with the soul on principle. This is inevitable 



inasmuch as and so long as they are not repelled from their conclusions by the 
actual experience of the essential triviality of all worldly pursuits for their own 
sake. This is a disposition which only experience can teach. The pantheists are 
those who are in the heyday of their career of worldliness with an increasing 
belief in its worth and prospects. The Scriptures lead these people gently by the 
hand by seeming to agree with their conclusions and trying to modify their cause 
by pleading the advantages of moderation even in the case of worldly activity 
for its own sake. This is naturally and honestly construed by those who 
are genuine believers in Pantheism as a confirmation of their view by 
the Scriptures. But once the value of spiritual support begins to be really 
cherished even those sections of the Scriptures that are apparently devoted to 
the elucidation of the pantheistic position, offer sufficient material for our 
serious consideration leading to increasing modification of the pantheistic view¬ 
point based thereon. The raw teachers of pantheism do incalculable harm by 
their narrow sectarian advocacy of the principle of worldly felicity on the 
authority of the Scriptures. 

The unspiritual pantheistic view falls pat with the theory of Darwinian evolution 
and has accordingly captured the hearts of those modern scholars who are still 
under the spell of that theory. They are not, of course, prepared to admit their 
partiality for materialism, thanks to the way of escape that has been cleverly 
provided for them by the subtleties of the idealists who require careful attention 
from all students of the Absolute. The pantheism of Sree Sankaracharya is the 
typical case. He is the intellectual protagonist of the pantheistic view, basing his 
conclusions on apparently rational interpretation of the Scriptures. The view, 
which has really been in existence from a period long anterior to the time of 
Sankara, in its present current form professes to follow mainly the exposition of 
Sankara. But Sankara himself is not capable of being properly understood by a 
materialist. The big literature of commentaries that has been brought into being 
by the pseudo-followers of Sankara presents not Sankara’s view but that of the 
commentators themselves. 

Sankara seems to justify the worship of Nature in order to be able to get beyond 
Nature to Nature’s God Who, he declares, is unintelligible to the limited 
reason except as the incomprehensible reality identical with the cognitive 
principle. This analysis contains an encouragement to idolaters (pantheists) with 
a view to wean them ultimately from the worship of any form of mental 
concoction. 



The real difficulty that is experienced in accepting fully the philosophy of Sree 
Sankaracharya is that it is not possible to agree with his proposal in favour of the 
worship of Nature without discarding the purely spiritual point of view which 
the theory ultimately professes to seek to establish. By material means it is never 
possible to attain to the spiritual vision. Sankara does not also say so. 

He was forced to recognize the forms of pantheistic worship in order to get a 
hearing at all from idolaters. In this sense only his seeming advocacy of 
the cause of pantheism can be regarded as consistent with the spiritual 
standpoint. 

But Sankara has been exploited for a quite different purpose by the school of 
undifferentiated cognitive Monism. They want to make the ultimate 
Reality devoid of all activity. They also want to make it a Unity that is 
unintelligible and inexpressible. To this conclusion they try to arrive by 
following mainly the dialectic method of Sankara and secondarily by idealistic 
interpretation of the Scriptures. This is really empiricism pure and simple, the 
reference to the Scriptures being merely to fortify the conclusions of mental 
speculation. The objections to mental speculation as the method of quest of the 
Absolute, therefore, apply fully to this school. It is in fact in order to escape from 
this unanswerable charge that the believers in the undifferentiated Brahman 
are constrained to make their inconsistent appeal to the Scriptures. 

Looked at from the point of view of material thought the activity or existence of 
the spiritual principle is only capable of being negatively suspected by it. 

There can be no actual touch between material thought and the transcendental 

Absolute. This is admitted by Sankara who looks at the Absolute from His plane. 
But the words of Sankara are not comprehensible to those who do not possess 
the transcendental altitude of his vision. The seemingly negative conclusion of 
Sankara is accepted without its all-important reservations by the egoistic 
disposition of empiric thinkers who can follow Sankara only to a certain distance 
in the negative way. This is not their fault. It is inevitable. The spiritual issue can 
never be approached by mental speculation. It is the purpose of Sree 
Sankaracharya to demonstrate this to all open-minded persons by argument that 
is also intelligible to mentalists. But those who do not possess the requisite 
openness of judgment necessarily misunderstand the purpose of the great 
Acharya. 



The above four groups with their variants into which the empiric creeds are 
divided have been eternally occupied in propagating views that are calculated 
to lead us away from the quest of the Absolute. Unless one is prepared to cease 
to be guided by the accumulated load of misconceptions that have 
been sedulously impressed upon him by every empiric institution of this world it 
is not possible to be able to be disposed to catch the real meaning of the 
genuine teacher of the Absolute. That which I am going to relate next is, 
therefore, categorically different from the subject-matter treated by the empiric 
creeds. 

The Absolute is claimed to be the Reality proper that is eternally located beyond 
the scope of all experience of the limited and transitory available through the 
physical senses. The very first question that has to be answered before actually 
beginning a narration of the Absolute, is whether it will be possible for ordinary 
people of this world to catch the true meaning of such a narrative. The answer is 
given by the Scriptures. They say that the ordinary human being, provided he at 
all believes in the Absolute and is prepared to give Him his unconditional 
hearing, can by listening to the exposition of the activities of the Absolute 
recorded in the Scripture from the lips of self-realised souls attain to the 
knowledge of the Absolute, by the grace of the latter. This method is different 
from that of empiric quest and leads to a definite and thoroughly dependable 
result. 

The personal factor which is capable of being done away with in empiric 
epistemology, is the central and abiding feature of the method of the quest of the 
Absolute enjoined by the Scriptures. The Guru is the pivot of the whole process. 
The Scriptures regard the quest of the Absolute as identical with the quest of the 
spiritual preceptor. As soon as the spiritual preceptor is found the negative quest 
gives place to the positive knowledge. 

Therefore the question is resolved into the quest of the spiritual teacher. He is to 
be sought also by the spiritual method. There must be no empiric reservation in 
the quest which must be an exclusive search for the Absolute. This is 
the definition of shraddha ( faith). The necessity for it is not properly realised 
by everybody. Those who do not experience the necessity will not find 
the spiritual preceptor. Those who really feel it, will also find him. Till the 
spiritual preceptor is found it is idle to waste one's time on the study of the 
Scriptures. It is not possible to understand the narrative of the Absolute without 
the help of personal exposition by the preceptor. The preceptor and the disciple 



have to be brought into personal contact with one another if the latter is to 
benefit by the teaching. The personal relationship is that of absolute submission 
to the teacher on the part of the disciple. This must be so because the 
Predominating Absolute cannot be approached except by the method of absolute 
submission on the part of the predominated atomic particles. This absolute 
submission must not be fictitious. It must also be personal. 

The following narratives of the Absolute are found in the Scriptures. Their real 
meaning cannot be realised except by following the Scriptural method 
stated above. This discourse should be regarded as helpful in arousing faith in 
the Absolute by its rationalistic presentation of some of the grounds of such 
faith. It has a negative and symbolic value. It loosens the hold of empiric 
prejudices and thereby enables the Truth to be mirrored in our hearts opened to 
receive Him. After the soul has got tired of the death-like monotony of mental 
speculations regarding the Truth and has also had sufficient experience of the 
delusive nature of both empiric knowledge and its promised prospects, he is 
inclined by a sense of sheer helplessness and misery to turn to the method of 
absolute submission to the spiritual preceptor, and the Scriptures for relief. 

This negative attitude is turned into one of positive and earnest inquiry 
by accidental association with sadhus. It is for the reason of finding the sadhu 
that 

a person who is utterly disgusted with worldly living and the method of mental 
speculation, renounces the world and sets out on pilgrimage to holy places in 
search of self-realised souls who are supposed to reside at such places. It is 
rarely, indeed, that the true devotee of God reveals himself to the fortunate 
seeker. The sadhu is himself a transcendental being. To really know the sadhu is 
to be endowed with the spiritual vision. It is only by the Grace of God that the 
transcendental nature of His devotee can be realised. 

It is only after the sadhu has been found that spiritual pupilage can really begin 
by the process of unconditional submission to his guidance. Then the 
disciple has to pass through the period of novitiate. If he does this with a 
guileless heart he is rewarded with the sight of God Himself and with His 
transcendental and eternal service. This last is the summum bonum. There is, 
however, gradation in the transcendental service of Godhead. It is not possible 
for the soul liable to conditioned existence to have the full knowledge of the 
Absolute. The jiva-soul is delicately poised on the border-line that separates the 
limited from the spiritual. He has the potentiality of affinity for either. His 



affinity for the limited is due to freedom of initiative inherent in all animation 
conjoined to absence of perfect vision by reason of his tiny magnitude. Such 
affinity is, however, really opposed to his proper nature which is essentially 
spiritual. The affinity of the soul for the spiritual can, therefore, be maintained 
only by the help of souls who are not liable to affinity for the limited. These 
eternally free souls are the inseparable associated counterparts of the Supreme 
Soul or Godhead Himself. The sadhus have no mundane affinity. By the help of 
sadhus the conditioned soul is enabled to attain to the plane of the Absolute. 

But the novice has to pass through definite grades of progressive revelation. 

The full view of the Divinity is the last to be attained. The service of Divinity 
attains its perfection only on attainment of the complete vision. 

The first Appearance of Godhead to the view of the spiritual novice is as 
Vasudeva or the Transcendental supreme single Male Person. This dissipates his 
empiric error that the Truth is an abstract principle. The appearance of Vasudeva 
also frees the novice from the error that mistakes the Personality of the Absolute 
as having any mundane quality or reference. 

Vasudeva is self-revealed in the unobstructive cognitive essence of the pure soul. 
He is the positive Reality as distinguished from the abstraction of the mental 
speculationists from the fleeting impressions of deluding entities limited by 
material space and broken up by the operation of passing time. Vasudeva 
is located above and beyond this unwholesome mundane plane. The realisation 
of His Transcendental Personality is possible only to the spiritual 
cognitive principle, which is the essence of the soul, as distinguished from 
material or limiting principle. Vasudeva is the One Person without a second. He 
is a Person with a Transcendental figure resembling the actual form of a male 
human being but, inconceivably to us, free from all limited or unwholesome 
characteristics of the human form that is familiar to us. Vasudeva appears as the 
Sole Recipient of our service. He is realised as comprehending all existence 
including that of His servitors. He is Male but free from all mundane 
associations of sex. These opposite qualities are spontaneously reconciled in His 
Transcendental Personality. 

This is the first positive spiritual experience of the progressing novice. The 
worshipper of Vasudeva is, therefore, a truly spiritual devotee. He 
is categorically different from the atheist, agnostic, skeptic, elevationist 



or Salvationist who are all of them strictly confined to the mundane plane. 

The worship of Vasudeva is performed by the spiritual essence of the pure soul 
on the transcendental plane. Vasudeva can be worshipped only by the process 
that is absolutely free from all mundane reference. Therefore, the worship 
of Vasudeva is also a gift of Vasudeva Himself. Vasudeva is identical in 
essence with His worship and with His worshipper. All of them belong to the 
same plane of the soul which is located beyond the scope of our limited 
mental faculties. Vasudeva manifests Himself to the pure essence of the jiva-soul 
as soon as the latter is at all disposed to serve Him in the proper way. It is 
rarely that a conditioned soul can attain to the spiritual service of Vasudeva. 

The conditioned soul is ordinarily prepared to be content with negative 
speculation. Very few persons of this world realise the necessity of search for the 
Supreme Personality Who is revealed to us by all the Scriptures. 

Everything concerning Vasudeva is purely spiritual. His name, servitors, 
paraphernalia, abode, form, activities are an inseparable part and parcel 
of Himself. No amount of description can enable the reader to realise the nature 
of Vasudeva so long as one is not freed from the fetters of his limited faculties 
of apprehension. Vasudeva can be realised only by the grace of His devotee if 
we are really prepared to follow his instructions in every act of our life. 

The devotee of Vasudeva can alone properly instruct us regarding the nature of 
the receptive attitude that is the natural position of the pure soul in regard to 
the Absolute and which can be restored to the conditioned soul only by the grace 
of Vasudeva if its attainment is sincerely desired by him, by the grace of 
His devotee. 

The sight of Vasudeva disposes of all the doubts and difficulties of atheists and 
agnostics and skeptics, as a matter of course. The sight of Vasudeva 
also destroys the idols of the pantheists and the nihilism of the pseudo-monists. 
The Truth is actually found to have the figure of a human being. This is not in 
any way derogatory to the Truth. Man is located in the middle position. 

There extend on either side of him, above and below, two infinite gradations 
of superior and inferior beings. Godhead would, therefore, be conceived by 
our limited understanding as occupying the highest position in the series. 

But would this assumption be also logical ? The prevailing notion in favour 
of making Godhead something altogether unlike man is no less fanatical than 
the opposite notion cherished by the anthropomorphists of making Him 
identical with man. It is not impossible to steer clear of this double fanaticism. 
The Scriptures declare that Godhead possesses a Form that is identical with 



Himself and that the Divine Form is ultimately like that of man. Godhead has 
an infinity of Forms but His Human Form is His Fullest, Highest and His 
Own Specific Personality. 

So Vasudeva is not to be confounded with any object of Physical Nature nor with 
any product of mental speculation. He is located beyond Physical Nature and 
beyond the mental scope. Yet Vasudeva has the Form of a human being. He has 
an infinity of Forms who are secondary extensions of this original Divine Form. 
The Scriptures fully support the Biblical dictum that man is made after God’s 
own image. It is needless to labour the point further at this place. 

The sight of Vasudeva, therefore, shatters all idols and substitutes of Divine 
Personality by revealing the real Object of all worship. This is the beginning 
of positive theism. Vasudeva, by His Human Form, pervades the whole 
world. Hence He is Vishnu. But Vasudeva pervades the mundane world without 
being of it. As pervading Physical Nature Vasudeva bears the name of Vishnu. 
Those fortunate souls who realise this fact are called Vaishnavas or worshippers 
of Vishnu. No one who is not a Vaishnava can be a theist. The Vaishnava is 
endowed with the experience of the transcendental plane and is thus in a position 
to understand how Godhead pervades all Physical Nature without possessing any 
mundane organs or forms. The enlightenment is imparted by Vasudeva Himself. 

The soul of man can know Vasudeva by His grace. The corresponding attitude in 
the recipient of His Grace is that of the unconditionally submitting disposition. If 
a person is not prepared to submit unreservedly for being enlightened by grace 
he cannot attain to the sight of Vasudeva and is doomed by his own vain choice 
to grope endlessly in the dark, unwholesome labyrinths of Physical Nature. By 
such unspiritual activity the soul may attain all conceivable conditions on the 
higher and lower mundane planes, but he can never attain to the vision of 
Vasudeva. Vasudeva has strictly reserved the right of not being exposed to the 
view of the conditioned soul who is not prepared to render Him willing and 
unconditional service. Vasudeva manifests Himself to the unclouded cognition of 
the soul in his perfect state of causeless, spontaneous, submissive devotion to 
Himself. So the two processes are simultaneous without being in any way related 
to one another as cause and effect. This is inconceivable to the limited 
experience of men but need not be logically considered as impossible in the 
Divinity. It ensures the reconciliation of perfect freedom of initiative on the part 
of the individual soul with the necessity of unconditional dependence on the 
Divinity for all real well-being. The empiricist's contention that as all language is 



a product of the limiting energy in the form of mundane Nature the very terms 
used to denote a spiritual entity only prove the inevitable mundane origin of an 
idea, does not apply to the case of the revealed vocabulary. It is not the 
contention of the transcendentalist that the Reality is more than one. What the 
transcendentalist declares is that there is possibility of suppressed, blurred and 
misguided vision of the Reality. The Energy that causes this distortion 
necessarily creates the mundane world of the distorted vision as the complement 
of such vision. The whole affair is not also unrelated to the Reality. It is the 
deluding face of the Reality Who is undoubtedly One. There is thus a running 
correspondence between the mundane and the transcendental as far as there is no 
actual suppression of the latter. The vocabulary of this world is, therefore, 
applicable also to the transcendental realm but only in the transcendental sense. 

The real difficulty is that the transcendental sense cannot be possessed by any 
one who is not favoured by the Grace of God. The actual number of 
such persons in the state of grace is very small in this world. The voice of 
this infinitesimal minority is liable to be ignored by those whose object is 
to proclaim views arrived at by their limited experiences. Once the necessity of 
the transcendental vision is properly aroused in any person he is not likely, to 
urge these empiric objections against the transcendental position. 

The name ‘Vasudeva’ is identical with the Divinity. But this is true in the 
transcendental sense only. In the transcendental sense, however, it is really true. 
Nay more, Vasudeva is the only real Truth. He is the Absolute Truth Himself. 

The empiric limited, relative apprehension of the name Vasudeva is not Absolute 
Truth. It is the product of the distorted view of the Truth Who can be but 
Absolute. In this distorted sense the empiric realisation is not untrue. But it is not 
given to those who are themselves under the delusion to realise this actual state 
of affairs. The person who possesses the absolute vision can alone understand 
the real position of the empiricists. He does not ignore the empiric view nor 
denies its existence. He only says that it is real, but distorted, view of the Truth 
Who is one and the same in Himself . 

It is of course not possible to push the empiricists up to the transcendental level 
by the force of controversy alone. Because all appeal to the empiricists on 
behalf of the Absolute is ultimately based on the realisation of the Absolute as 
the only Reality. So long as a person does not possess the actual experience of 
the Absolute he can but look through the false glasses that are alone available 
to him. The empiricist can have no real Sight of the Absolute as He is, till he 



is favoured by the Grace of God. At the most he can only admit the necessity 
of Divine Grace for obtaining the view of the Absolute, Real or Substantive 
Truth. It is only then that he can really understand the tme meaning of 
the proposition regarding the Absolute, viz., that the Name Vasudeva is 
identical with Godhead Himself. 

Therefore, those who may be disposed to accept in principle the worship of 
Vasudeva but are opposed to the phraseology and ritual that are 
actually employed in His worship, still continue to flounder in the empiric bog. 
Such blind assent will do them no real good. Their assent is assent in the 
empiric sense which is no assent to the Absolute. But there is also such a thing 
as real assent to the Absolute. This assent is the attitude of the awakened soul. 
This assent is identical with the whole process of worship of Vasudeva, 
including its ritual and vocabulary. 

The objection to detail under the cover of a general assent to principle, is a 
dangerous ruse that is often resorted to by self deluded mentalists for 
avoiding, the clear confession of the Truth. The attitude is really at the far end 
the product of that radical insincerity of disposition which feels an 
abnormal perverse joy in opposing the Truth at all costs. The objection against 
the vocabulary and ritual should be perfectly untenable if it is made to rest, as 
it really is, on such thin casuistry. There does exist the legitimate 
objection against lifeless ritual and pseudo-exhibitions of irrational orthodox. 
But even condemnation of the hypocrite however justifiable in itself is liable 
to degenerate into the most subtle and dangerous form of insincerity if it does 
not proclaim a stronger inclination to the Truth Himself . 

As a matter of fact the Tmth is one and indivisible. But He is not therefore, 
really zero. When we think of Him we require to be on our guard 
against worldliness on the one hand and hypocrisy on the other. The one leads 
to worship of Physical Nature or Pantheism in all its forms and the other 
to Nihilism which is only the negation of Pantheism and can exist at all only in 
a relation of contradiction to it. Both Pantheism and Non-ism are accustomed 
to profess its identity with Monotheism. The followers of both creeds 
are worldlings of opposite schools who have no intention of acting up to 
their professions. Neither is it practicable for them to do otherwise. It is possible 
for them to be relieved of these anomalous conditions only by the actual 
realisation of self-consistency by the attainment of the real knowledge of the 
Truth which none of them possesses. The empiric ignorance of Truth is not one 



of degree. It is one of category. The empiricists can form no idea of the nature of 
the Truth as He really is. For such a person to set up as a critic of the Truth, is 
sheer folly and malice. To try to mask one's foolishness and malice under the 
garb of a kind of a hollow ethical prejudice, makes it doubly worse. The empiric 
critics of the worship of Vasudeva formulated in the Scriptures, should not 
ruthlessly sin against these universal canons of sound constructive criticism. 

It is for this very reason that the study of the Scriptures is forbidden to those who 
do not possess the necessary preliminary knowledge that should 
effectively prevent the assumption of an attitude of profanity. There is nothing to 
be gained by any form of real opposition to the Truth. Even the empiricists 
should be able to see this although in their distorted manner. 

The different creeds and Scriptures as interpreted by the empiric judgment, tend 
to the elaboration of a hybrid theology that is neither here nor there. Empiric 
theology is a sheer contradiction in terms. The Absolute 
comprehends everything but is Himself ever incomprehensible. The empiric 
judgment is not honestly prepared to admit that the Absolute is the only 
Substantive Existence. The moment that we admit this we realise the necessity 
of waiting on the pleasure of the Absolute in all our activities. Vasudeva is 
pleased to reveal Himself to this purified submissive state of the soul. The pure 
soul fully recognizes the causeless Grace of Vasudeva as the sole sufficing cause 
of the realisation of the Incomprehensible by our present otherwise limited 
faculties. The pure soul deduces all his conclusions regarding proprietv of his 
conduct from this fundamental admission. 

Once this position is really taken up by the soul he ceases to quarrel with the 
Scriptures even when he does not understand. He now knows that it is 
not possible nor necessary to understand the Truth in the empiric sense of 
the term. There is such a thing as real understanding which can be only a gift 
from the living Truth and identical with Him. The appearance of the Truth on 
His own initiative is both the cause and result of all real knowledge. 

These processes are one and indivisible. They only manifest themselves to 
the receptive consciousness of the submissive soul by their own free choice. 

The empiric attitude is that of revolt against this unconditional supremacy of 
the one living Truth. It stands in the way of unreserved faith in the Scriptures 
as the necessary preliminary condition of the right understanding of the 
Absolute. The attitude of submission to the Absolute is neither blind nor slavish 
nor a gross form of superstition. It is the awakening of the real rational function 



of which all mental activity is but disloyal, hideous caricature. 


The spiritual guide who imparts the knowledge of the Absolute is then found to 
be part and parcel of the true rational existence. The rituals of the 
spiritual Scriptures are realised as the eternal function of the soul who is by his 
real nature free from all worldly taint and weaknesses. 

The fool's paradise is the one that all persons possess by the inalienable right of 
mundane birth. It is superfluous to carry the same into the real paradise. It 
is necessary for the attainment of this latter purpose to desist from the building 
of Babel. It is necessary to desist from all speculation on the subject as it 
is obstructive of the advent of the Truth. The Truth is ever seeking entry into 
the heart that is really open to welcome Him. The closed heart alone is busy in 
the fool's paradise and with its own disloyal fancies. Till one really knows Him 
one need not proclaim that he does. This rule is admitted by all but is observed 
by very few persons when they try to talk about the real Truth. The Truth 
can never be mastered by our puppy brain. It is the puppy brain that should 
be allowed to be mastered by the Truth for its own benefit. But it is the Nature 
of Truth to accept only perfectly willing service. It is, therefore, only necessary 
to reject all untruth and to await the coming of the Truth. This can be done if 
we only choose to do it. When one wishes to render such unconditional homage 
to the Truth his wish is fulfilled by the Truth Himself. The cobwebs of a 
deceptive moral code cannot then any longer bind his eyes and stifle his heart's 
sincerity. Vasudeva then manifests Himself to the pure essence of the soul of His 
loyal devotee. 

As soon as a person is really established in the worship of Vasudeva by His 
Grace he is endowed with the disposition that opens up to his vision the definite 
vista of the Divine Realm. He is conducted by the Light of Vasudeva into the 
Realm of the Absolute. He finds it inhabited by the servants of Vasudeva. 
Vasudeva now presents His fuller Aspect in the coupled Form of Lakshmi- 
Narayana, the Eternal Lord and His one eternal Consort ever linked to His side 
as His Counter-Whole. Lakshmi is found to be the medium of all wellbeing. 

Personality is conjoined with sex in the experience derived through our limited 
senses. The principle of sex need not, therefore, be dismissed as 
necessarily inapplicable to the Absolute. Male and female run through all 
physical Nature binding together its jarring elements in a union of wonderful 
harmony. Why should the sex be regarded as less indispensable in the Realm of 



the Absolute? The principle of personality implies the co-existence of a specific 
free will and its possessor. Thus stated it would seem to exclude all reference to 
sex. The will is found to be the same in both male and female in this world. Sex 
does not seem to modify the specific nature of the individual will. It is perfectly 
possible to conceive a female form being endowed with the will of a male or 
vice versa. The factor of the sex seems to lie on the surface. As Godhead and the 
individual soul are ordinarily identified as regards their essence with the 
cognitive principle itself it is imagined to be in keeping with such identification 
not to admit the presence of the sex principle in Godhead. 

This is, however, merely the psychological explanation of the genesis of the 
view that ultimately favours the idea of impersonality. But impersonality 
cannot stand on its own legs; it necessarily implies the personal. God should 
include both. He should be both personal and impersonal. But He could not 
be positively real without being personal. The negative quality can be but 
a background but cannot itself be the picture. The impersonal idea is at best 
of the nature of an inferential surmise of the Reality from an 
unrecognisable distance. The closer view relieves us from the necessity of 
retaining the dogmas of impersonality and abstraction. 

Why should not Godhead be a Person. Why should He not be Male or Female? 
Why should He be only sexless? As a Person why should He possess no 
Form corresponding to our physical body? And corresponding to these arise 
the questions “Why have I a sex. Is the sex a constituent of my present 
personality? Would my personality suffer by elimination of sex? What 
connection has the principle of sex with the physical body? Will my personality 
be modified by any change in the physical body? These and similar questions lie 
at the very basis of the individual life. 

The rational attitude should be to recognise the fact of the sex and to admit the 
existence of a corresponding spiritual principle. But it is not possible for 
a person on the strength of mundane knowledge to form any idea of the nature 
of the spiritual principle We are sometimes disposed to think that it is given to 
us to approach the Absolute by way. of service in certain forms. The issue of 
sex gives the direct lie to any such supposition. It shows clearly that it is 
never possible to rise from the physio-mental plane to the spiritual. This of 
course holds also in the case of similar empirical assumption regarding any 
other principle of spiritual service. 



But we can understand by the parity of reason that the principle must exist in an 
inconceivable form. We are supported by the Scriptures. Sreemad Bhagavatam 
makes the subject its central topic, round which all other topics are made to turn. 
The principle is found to occupy a correspondingly important position in the life 
of man in this world. So there is nothing peculiar or objectionable about the 
position. The objection of purists is due to the ignorance of the full claim of the 
Absolute. 

By means of argument alone we cannot go beyond the point that we have now 
reached. The sex is found to be admissible in the Absolute. But the nature of the 
Personality of the Divine Couple, Sree Sree Lakshmi-Narayana, is other 
wise unintelligible to the limited understanding. Its knowledge can only be 
received by grace and is, therefore, a matter of actual realisation on the path of 
spiritual endeavour. 

We, therefore, reach the conclusion that the Divinity is a Transcendental Person. 
His Personality manifests Himself to us at first as that of a Male. This is the 
realisation of Divinity as Sree Vasudeva. Rut on closer acquaintance we find His 
fuller Form of the Eternal Couple, viz., Sree Sree Lakshmi-Narayana. 

Sree Narayana appears as the Lord, Sree Lakshmi as His Consort. Sree Narayana 
is the Wielder and Sree Lakshmi is the Executrix of the Divine Will. 

Sree Narayana manifests all His Activities through His Counter-Whole. This is 
the nature of relationship between the Divine Couple. 

The Sanskrit word “Shakti" expresses the spiritual principle that corresponds to 
the female. The word may he rendered as "Energy" "Potency" or "Power". 

Sree Lakshmi is Divine Power. The personality of Power is feminine, that of 
the Possessor of Power is Masculine. Godhead is the Possessor of infinite 
Power. Power is not dissociable from her Possessor. In this sense Divine Power 
is identical with Godhead. But Godhead is more than His Power. He is the 
Source and Wielder of Power. In exercise of His Power Godhead is realised as 
Couple. Godhead is fully realised as co-existing with His eternal Consort. The 
nearest physical analogy is that of the Sun in the embrace of the assemblage of 
heat and light. Neither light nor heat is the Sun who is their otherwise 
unknowable Source. They are manifestations of the potency of the Sun. It is not 
possible to describe the relationship of Power with the Source of all Power in 
terms of any mental or physical experience. It is possible only to indicate it by 
way of an extremely imperfect analogy. 



The Eternal Consort of Godhead co-exists with Godhead. She is the 
predominated moiety of the Absolute. The predominating moiety is her Lord and 
Master, Godhead Himself. This is the fuller idea of the Divine Personality. In the 
soul of man there also exists will in the embrace of power but both of them in an 
infinitesimally small measure. This smallness of his magnitude is realised by the 
individual soul by the service of the Divine Couple. It is possible for the soul of 
the jiva to try to live on his own paltry resources. This leads to a wrong estimate 
of his place and function in the Absolute. The point of view that such a course 
produces is responsible for the misdirection of the soul's activities in the state of 
self-elected willful ignorance that is to be found in this world. 

So there is progressive revelation of the nature of the Divinity on the path of 
pure spiritual service. The upward tendency is towards realisation of the 
nature of the full scope of all the concrete relationships imperfectly mirrored in 
the deluding correspondences of this world, by the soul of man. In this world it 
is given only to man to have a corresponding existence. The soul of man is 
thus truly the centre of the phenomenal cosmos. This is not the case with any 
other sentient being, either higher or lower, of this world. The beings of 
apparently more favoured mundane worlds live under conditions that are less 
favourable for the realisation of the Absolute. This is due to the fact that they 
find their position more enjoyable. For the opposite reason the beings of lower 
worlds or stages are also placed in a worse position than man with reference to 
the Absolute. 

These infinite gradations of life also exist as their corresponding realities in the 
realm of the Absolute, enveloping the human personality by their 
serving activities and affording necessary guidance for the realisation of the 
most perfect service that is found also here on the plane that corresponds to that 
of humanity. Sree Sree Lakshmi-Narayana are Objects of worship of this 
spiritual human plane. They enable us to attain the realisation of the 
concrete relationship of human service in its diffident forms. The development 
of the serving principle leads gradually to the inner and more concrete planes of 
the worship of Rama-Sita, of Sree Krishna in Dwaraka, of Sree Krishna in 
Mathura and finally of Sree Krishna in Brindabana. The word "rasa” means that 
which produces the sensation of "taste" in its most comprehensive sense. That 
which imparts to human life the quality of being tasted by its possessor is the 
most fundamental of all principles of value of life. The-range and quality of 
the realised taste-imparting principle is the cause of the desire for and bliss 
of existence. Man lives here in this world on the sweets and bitters of 



his mundane sojourn. If he is deprived of this faculty of taste life is 
rendered meaningless and contemptible. 

The leavening principle points to the sexual relationship as one of its cardinal 
references. This is consciously realisable by most persons in their 
actual relationships in this world. But the sexual relationship, although capable 
of being reached by way of argument as forming directly or indirectly the basis 
of all sweetness and bitterness on the mundane plane, is itself apprehended as 
a dangerous, delicate and unintelligible subject. It is also the basis of the taste 
of grossness in its most unwholesome forms. 

The worship of Godhead is realisable in terms of the quality of spiritual taste 
evoked and fostered by His service. The relationships of this world, supplied 
by their deluding correspondence, give a clue to the spiritual quality but they 
can never give any substantive idea of the reality which is free from all 
possibility of unwholesomeness. In fact it is the attitude of the individual soul 
that is the cause of all experience of unwholesomeness born of limited vision. As 
the scope of vision of the individual expands he realises an increasing 
freedom from the sense of unwholesomeness. But this does not apply to the 
mundane plane where the so called expansion of empiric knowledge (?) tends to 
multiply ignorance and the possibility of unlimited grossness. 

The conclusion to which such considerations tend to lead may be stated in the 
following manner. Spiritual life is categorically different from the mundane. 

No activity on the mundane plane by its mere dimension or manipulation, can 
ever lead to the Absolute. The difference between the mundane and 
spiritual function, may be indicated by the corresponding difference of attitude 
towards the Absolute on the part of the individual soul. The mundane attitude is 
that of a desire to lord it over the Absolute. The spiritual attitude is that of 
service by the process of unconditional enlightening submission to the Absolute. 
In proportion as submission to the Absolute tends to be perfected by 
practice under the guidance of the Absolute, the scope of the spiritual vision of 
the individual expands and produces a corresponding progressive excellence of 
the tasting process. Judged by this standard the service of Sree Sree Radha- 
Govinda is the perfection of bliss attainable by the individual soul. 

Not that Sree Sree Radha-Govinda is essentially different from Lord Vasudeva. 
They are one and the same, being the Divinity Himself. But the worshipper 
of Lord Vasudeva does not possess the full scope of spiritual vision. He 



can, however, obtain the expanded vision only by the faithful service of 
Lord Vasudeva and by His grace. 

The faithful servant of Lord Vasudeva will find in the Object of his worship Sree 
Sree Lakshmi-Narayana, Sree Sree RamaSita, Sree Sree Dwarakesha- 
Rukminisha-Krishna, Sree Sree Mathuresha-Krishna and finally Sree Sree 
Radha-Krishna in Brindabana. 



5 History Of Atheism 


Faith in a Personal Godhead and inclination to serve Him are not the artificial 
products of material civilization. Many books have been written by 
empiric thinkers to prove the historical origin of a belief in God as a product 
and concomitant of material circumstances. Such attempts betray an attitude of 
selfcontradiction in regard to the nature of the super-mundane. These 
writers, almost deliberately confound religion, which is the eternal spiritual 
function of all individual souls, with the apparently similar mental speculations 
on the same subject although it is more or less admitted by all persons as lying 
outside the range of our sensuous experience. Nevertheless these assume religion 
to be the equivalent of a bundle of ideas that have their temporary existence in 
their own imaginations, and proceed to analyze what they suppose to be the 
similar mental phenomena of past generations with the tacit object of finding 
further support for, and for the elaboration of their pre-conceived views. 

Religion is supposed to be only a special department of thought produced by the 
mind by working on a particular aspect of the materials presented to it by the 
senses. This mental religion is more or less the method as well as goal of 
investigation of empiric moralists, theologians and scientists. Empiric criticism 
of the Bible and all mental treatment of the subject of religion, are vitiated by the 
adoption of this faulty method of begging the question at issue. 

It is necessary to approach the subject with a mind free from prejudices that may 
have been engendered by such tentative and inconclusive speculations. Love for 
God and desire to serve Him are functions of the soul, and, as such, are located 
beyond the sphere of our physico-mental experience which is strictly confined to 
the sense-perceptions of material space and time. They are not of the nature of 
positive or negative ideas, however refined, that have their non-permanent 
existence in our sensuous mind, nor are they of the nature of physical activities 
in continuation of such ideas, that bear the names of “love” and “service” in the 
current speech of the world. These have a beginning and an end and by their 
nature are subject to perpetual modifications. But love of God and service of 
God which belong to the soul, are eternal and unchangeable. They are not erring 
mental notions but the reality in the form of the only function of our souls and 
belong to a plane of existence higher than the sensuous mind, to which no critic 
of the empiric school has any access. 

But our sensuous minds are, and have been always, enabled, by the grace of 



God, to believe, no doubt dimly and imperfectly, in the great difference that must 
always exist between the physio-mental and the spiritual, whenever we are in a 
position to turn to the subject, which is always knocking at our door, our 
unbiased attention, in other words, when we are sincerely desirous of knowing 
the Absolute. On the path of such enquiry, the first axiom to which our 
unreserved assent is invited is this, viz., that the service of the Absolute is the 
only function of our soul in her pure, natural state. The fact may also be stated 
thus in terms of her present temporary, deluded existence, viz., that 
the inclination to serve the Absolute is innate in the soul and is, 
spontaneously aroused and asserts its superiority to all other forms of activity as 
soon as the nature of the service is properly explained, the resistance of her 
physical and mental equipments notwithstanding provided she gives to the 
subject, which she is free to do, her unbiased attention. This natural inclination 
to serve God has been present in the souls of men in every position of their 
material civilization and independently of such civilization. 

This inclination to serve God and the actual service of God which exist eternally, 
are screened from the view of deluded humanity by their preference for worldly 
activities through ignorance due to the desire for meddling with objects that 
seem to promise and also yield transient sensuous pleasures. But whenever there 
has been a determined effort by atheists to suppress religion altogether it has 
reacted against such pressure and successfully reasserted itself in a clearer form 
than before, triumphantly silencing its opponents. It is possible to write the 
history of this eternal conflict, in its various forms, of atheism against religion. 
The history of theism which is eternal can, therefore, be said in this sense to 
begin with this world, i.e., as soon as the individual soul comes under the 
conditions of material space and time, due to her eternal tendency towards the 
service of Godhead against her counter-tendency to worldliness, roused to 
activity by atheistical opposition. 

Atheism, the correlative of theism, is of this world and has always existed, and 
has often predominated, in it. In this world men are found to be naturally divided 
into two mutually hostile groups, viz., (1) those who seek what is permanently 
good for them, and ( 2 ) those who desire what appears to be pleasant, without 
considering the consequences of its acceptance. The number of those who 
belong to the first group has always been infinitesimally small in this world 
which is of the nature of a temporary abode, or rather, house of correction, of 
those souls who have lapsed from the state of grace by reason of their preferring 
the pursuit of selfish enjoyment to service of Godhead. Atheism has been on the 



whole, the prevailing creed of this world. It has, however, been always 
compelled to masquerade in the garb of religion. But whenever atheism has been 
openly professed by the greatest leaders of thought and has appeared to be on the 
point of scoring a final and decisive victory over its rival with their influential 
support, the latter has invariably re-asserted itself, has demolished all efforts of 
the former and has consolidated its position by the refutation of such arguments 
as had been urged, or had seemed likely to be urged in the future, against it by its 
opponents, to an extent that was within the grasp of the contemporaneous 
generations. Atheistic opposition has thus resulted in the gradual and further 
elucidation of the theistic position. But although the opponents of theism have 
been silenced from time to time they are not always really converted to the views 
of their victorious rival, with the exception of a very small number; although 
most of them are compelled to profess a temporary, hypocritical allegiance to the 
manifested Truth, from worldly considerations. These hypocritical followers, 
indeed, afterwards prove the worst enemies of the re-established religion, and by 
their show of its acceptance prepare to betray the citadel to the enemy, till at last 
rottenness inside and outside the system necessitates a vigorous re-assertion of 
the Truth for the benefit of the few who really want to serve God. 

It takes a considerable time after birth for a man to acquire a fair measure of 
experience of the material world. The term ‘matter’is applied to those 
external objects and their qualities that are perceived by the senses. In proportion 
as the senses of the child are developed they are enabled to have a fuller 
‘knowledge’ of the qualities of material objects, and to enjoy in an apparently 
more and more ‘conscious’ manner the pleasures yielded by such exercise of the 
senses. The more the qualities of material objects are ‘enjoyed’the stronger the 
desire for such enjoyment becomes, till gradually the minds of men become 
so devotedly attached to this pleasurable exercise of the senses that they have 
no taste left for anything else. The pleasures of sound, touch, colour, taste 
and smell thus tend to colour and impart an overpowering charm to all activities 
of the mind and invite the deluded soul to be naturalized to the condition. 

The soul once enslaved to the mental outlook cannot be roused to grasp 
the unwholesome transitory character of the earthly sojourn although 
constantly reminded of the same by the most significant facts of her worldly 
experience, viz., birth and death, and she seems to forget for all practical 
purposes the fact that as soon as one dies one ceases to have any further 
connection by way of continuity of consciousness with these very material 
objects that appear to possess a distinctive individual reference to him when 
alive. If by rare good fortune, the clear consciousness of the transitoriness of the 



worldly life is awakened in the deluded soul, she naturally tries to desist from 
the exclusive pursuit of worldly enjoyment and turns round to reconsider the 
whole position. A person who stops in the midst of his worldly pursuits to 
consider the implication of their transitory nature, puts to himself in some form 
or other these three questions, viz. ‘Who am I, the apparent enjoyer of this 
world? 

’‘What is this vast world itself?’ ‘W hat is the real nature of the relation between 
this world and myself?’ 

Whenever the soul with her back to worldly pursuits asks the above questions 
she finds the answer in her own awakened consciousness The answer which 
the inquiring soul receives being put together in a systematic form, comes to 
be known as science and philosophy. The answer which the soul receives may 
be either (1) her own real consistent answer or (2) of a heterogeneous 
character. But why does not the soul, who is in essence the same, receive the 
same kind of answer in all cases? 

The real nature of the soul is purely spiritual. The answer which she gives when 
she is in her own proper condition is the true answer and is the same in all cases. 
This mundane world is not her real home. It is material, that is to say, not of the 
essence of the soul but the product of the deluding power of God which makes it 
resemble the realm of the spirit. The illusion-producing power who has made 
this world is of the nature of the shadow of the superior spiritual power of the 
Divinity. The individual soul is an infinitesimally small separable part of the 
latter whose nature she shares. The soul resident in this unspiritual world is 
under the delusion that her essence is material and she has a natural affinity with 
the deluding power although there is really no such affinity at all. This is a 
heterogeneous alliance. The deluded soul’s own proper nature is eclipsed and 
becomes dormant by the operation of the deluding energy resulting in the 
apparent identification by herself of her function with those of the body and 
limited mind, being thus unnaturally alloyed with the qualities of material 
energy. The individual soul whose real nature is purely spiritual, on imbibing 
this mixed character by operation of the material energy of God, functions by 
direction of the material mind in accordance with the dictates of this 
adventitious, unnatural, ‘second’ nature. The spiritual principle of selfluminous 
cognition, by such subordination to the principle of limitation, is perverted into 
the mind of the fallen jiva which is an extraordinary mixture, or rather 
incarceration, of spirit in a subtle material case. The answers that the mixed 



mind under the lead of the deluding material energy of God, returns to the 
questions put to it, are also necessarily heterogeneous, that is, selfcontradictory. 
These answers of the soul fettered in the material mind reflect the heterogeneity 
of customs, dress, food, language and mode of thought of the country of the 
temporary sojourn of the physical body which encases the mind. Differences in 
respect of place of residence, age and condition of the physical body, all tend to 
make the answer correspondingly different in every case. 

There is thus a twofold perversion due to the twofold incarceration of the soul in 
matter, viz., in the subtle form of mind and grosser form of physical body, 
by means of which she is deluded into relation of affinity with country, 
race, language, etc., which differ in the case of different individuals represented 
now by the physical body and mind. 

In order to discuss in an adequate manner and in detail these heterogeneous 
answers it would be necessary to examine the history of all countries, to 
come into direct contact with the peoples by means of journeys through 
those countries and to master the different languages of the world. This is not 
the present purpose and a cursory glance at them will suffice to afford the reader 
a working idea of their general nature. 

Of the above two kinds of answers received by the soul that variety which is true 
is also the one that is alone reasonable. The heterogeneous answers, although 
extremely diverse in character, are also, however, divisible into two distinctive 
groups. The first group constitutes the body of empiric practice and theory of 
truth; the second group is represented by activities devised for the purpose of 
securing selfish, transitory, material enjoyment [(1) jnana and (2) karma]. 

We have stated above that the true answer is also the rational one. If objection is 
taken to our use of the word ‘rational’ in this connection on the ground that the 
material reason admits its affinity with the heterogeneity of physical Nature, our 
reply is that the vocabulary that is available for expressing spiritual facts has 
acquired the material connotation by habitual abuse. The current vocabulary 
both as regards its derivation and usage refers really and exclusively to the 
transcendental. The words ‘rational’ and ‘reason’ used by us in connection with 
the soul have reference to the distinctive spiritual faculty inherent in the soul that 
can never err and always serves the transcendental Truth. The corresponding 
material faculty that dominates the eclipsed soul being subservient to the 
deluding energy, is, in the case of fallen souls, the approver, by its constitution, 



of the heterogeneous existence. This faculty in its normal, spiritual condition 
naturally responds in the really rational way. 

That group of the two divisions of heterogeneous answers which has been named 
practice and theory of truth is the perversion corresponding to the Truth in the 
shape of answer returned by the pure soul that accepts the real and rejects the 
unreal. This heterogeneous ‘knowledge’ in its synthetic or positive aspect 
represents the qualities of matter and favours the view that matter is eternal and 
the ultimate cause of everything, and, negatively, tries to establish the view that 
the Brahman or the Absolute is devoid of all distinctive qualities, a conclusion 
which is reached by the denial of the existence of matter. 

That division of the heterogeneous answer which has been named activity in 
quest of transitory, selfish enjoyment, is the pursuit by the soul, under 
the domination of the deluding power, of non-God. The correlative of this is 
the pure rational activity of the soul in the form of the service of Godhead 
by means of spiritual thoughts and deeds. 

The heterogeneous answer, with which most of us are more or less familiar, may 
be conveniently considered under two heads, according to the nature of the 
object of human life offered for our acceptance which is either (1) 
material pleasure, or, (2) extinction of material existence. The heterogeneous 
answer confines itself, as regards its subject of reference, to phenomenal Nature 
which, according to this view, exhausts all existence. The view that holds 
material pleasure as the end is in its turn divided into two sections according as 
the pleasure to be pursued is either selfish or unselfish. 

We shall consider first the view that the end of human life is the attainment of 
selfish material pleasure. According to the supporters of this opinion there is 
no God, no soul, no other world, and no moral consequence of acts done by 
us. Our only proper function is to spend the time in constant sensuous 
pleasures with discretion to avoid any unpleasant worldly consequence. Such 
view has seldom been fully acted upon in civilized society. It has remained 
practically confined as theory to the persons who have conceived and 
propounded it in the different ages and countries. Such individuals are the 
Brahmana Charvaka in India, Yang Chu in China, Leucippus in Greece, 
Sardanapalus in Central Asia, Lucretius in Rome. Von Holbach maintains that 
the religion that leads to one's own selfish pleasure, is alone admissible. Religion 
is defined by him as the contrivance of securing one’s own pleasure by means of 



the pleasures of others. The professed followers of unselfish material enjoyment 
have been very numerous and have in fact included the vast majority of the 
people in all ages and countries. The school of godless fruitive work ( karma- 
kandis) of India is probably the oldest body of the credal followers of this view. 
According to this school Isvara (i.e ., the Supreme Ruler) is an entity that has no 
antecedent ( apurva ). The view has been supported by learned mal- 
interpretation of the Vedic Scriptures. Democritus, the exponent of the view in 
ancient Greece, holds that unoccupied space and matter are eternal, the 
difference between substances being quantitative and not qualitative. Knowledge 
is merely the state of conjunction of certain external and internal substances. All 
substances are made up of atoms. Kanada maintains the permanent qualitative 
difference between different classes of atoms. According to the Vaisheshika 
School the individual soul and the Oversoul belong to the category of 
substances. Plato and Aristotle do not admit God to be the only eternal entity nor 
as the only cause of the world. This makes their systems share the defects 
noticeable in Kanada. Gassendi, Diderot and La Mettrie belong to this class. 
According to Comte we should regard theism as infancy, philosophy as 
childhood and positivism as mature stage in the evolution of thought. Men are 
required to be philanthropically disposed and to be disinterestedly religious in 
their conduct. The earth is the supreme fetish of Comte, the country his supreme 
medium and human nature his supreme being. Mill is in substantial agreement 
with Comte. The propounders of secularism in England include the names of 
Mill, Lewis, Paine, Carlyle, Bentham, Combe, Holyoake, Bradlaugh. 

But the faculty of reason, even when it happens to be engrossed in matter, if only 
it could he induced to consider the subject in an impartial spirit, is bound to 
reject all these views for their extremely bad logic. The materialist proclaims the 
necessity and wisdom, above all things, of reducing the number of categories, 
and in fact it is this which leads him to deny the existence of the transcendental. 
But his own method leads him to the formulation of an infinite number of 
categories. Materialism is artificial and unscientific as it ignores the principle of 
self-consciousness and holds material Nature to be eternal. It calls self- 
consciousness a quality of matter and at the same time asserts it to be 
the regulative principle of the entity of which it is declared to be the quality. 

It involves the subordination of the principle of self-consciousness, which is 
the better and higher principle, to gross matter (Ferris). There is no proof of 
the permanence of matter (Prof. Tyndal). Boucher and Moleschott hold matter 
to be eternal, which is, however a mere assumption The view of Comte that 
man should cease from the enquiry of the beginning and end of the world, if 



really followed, would reduce man to equality with lifeless matter. No instance 
of any self-born man or of a man generated by the process of progressive 
evolution is known within the last three thousand years of human experience. 

The argument from design, if it be admitted, points to the principle of 
intelligence as the cause of the cosmic order and would thus be a complete 
refutation of all forms of materialism. 

If again we consider the actual conduct of materialists in regard to society we 
find that they hold it necessary for men to be religious, in their acts. Sin 
and righteousness are held to he productive respectively of pain and pleasure 
of men in general. Pleasure for oneself should conform to the pleasure that 
is disinterested. By the practice of religion sin and its resultant misery are got 
rid of. It is necessary for men to investigate those laws that enable them 
to maintain their existence in society. The actions performed by men bear 
fruit even after their death for other beings of this world. In this sense acts never 
die. Acts are transformed into forces that did not exist before, such forces, 
being nourished by other future acts, are the cause of the continued improvement 
of the world. This is the disinterested reward of one’s acts. 

The professors of disinterested material pleasure as the object of human life are, 
in fact, identical with the school that regard the selfish pleasure of oneself as the 
object of life. This is proved by Von Holbach under the name of Miraboud in his 
“System of Nature” (1770). In that work he has shown that there is no such thing 
as disinterestedness in this world. Religion is only a contrivance of securing on's 
own pleasures by making others happy. No one would care to do that which did 
not bring pleasure to himself. Even the sacrifice of life is made for pleasing 
oneself. All pleasures flowing from religion are for one's own self. Even love for 
God is for one's own pleasure. Whatever is natural is necessarily selfish because 
nature refers to the self. Selfishness is natural. Disinterestedness is unnatural and 
is never to be found. 

The view that God is that which is without antecedent and identical with power 
or force, as propounded by Jaimini and Western scholars, never appeals to those 
who possess clearness of understanding. Those who accept their view have to be 
content with a part of the whole. The view of the non-antecedentists is directly 
opposed to the idea of God. Jaimini was well aware of the existence of a natural 
inclination in the hearts of men to submit to God and has accordingly very 
cleverly and with great assiduity conceived a god as the awarder of the fruits of 
our actions and included him in his category of the nonantecedent It is due to 



this cleverness in providing a reference to a god that the view of the Smarta 
Pandits advocating godless fruitive works, has been so vigorously prevalent in 
India. People with a cloudy intellect extend a ready welcome to the view of the 
professors of so-called disinterestedness in the hope of securing at a trifling cost 
the reward of unselfishness. This is another powerful reason for the spread of the 
creed of atheistic fruitive works. 

The instructions of the professors of disinterested material pleasures may be 
appreciated at first, to a certain extent, by people by reason of their 
own selfishness; but they will scruple less to commit sinful acts the more they 
will enter into the spirit of the system. It is in this way that the system 
quickly enough degenerates into one of expediency pure and simple in which 
every individual member is free to act for his own pleasures in a way that 
appears to him to be not obviously against the general interest, and soon learns 
to care only for the external appearance of his acts. In the absence of a God to 
punish, the only check on the most reckless pursuit of selfish pleasures will be 
the fear of public exposure; and various expedients will accordingly be devised 
for avoiding the consequences of such a contingency. The truth of this criticism 
is corroborated by the notoriously lax practices of the ordinary Smarta 
Pandits who are adepts in twisting the rules to any extent to suit their 
individual purposes. 

In the nominal provision for the worship of a god as found in this system we do 
not notice any of the characteristics of real devotion to God. Some of these 
even opine that the worship of God is only a variety of fruitive works; or, in 
other words, that it is prescribed for people in a general way and is optional in 
their own case. Comte has provided for the worship of his conceptions as God 
for the reason that they appeared to him to be true. In this Comte is more 
sincere; but Jaimini and the others are more far-sighted. The views of Comte 
and Jaimini are identical in theory. Those theories of the elevationists in 
effect sometimes affect to say to devotion’, “I follow you. I make men fit for 
devotion to God. I shall bring the sinners to your feet after purifying their 
minds”. These professions are the result of duplicity When work truly follows 
devotion it does not claim any separate recognition of itself but is content to pass 
under the name of devotion. So long, however, as work is disposed to retain its 
own separate designation it seeks its own glorification as a rival process 
claiming equality with devotion. This attitude leads it to claim all credit for 
every effort for the advancement of science, of society and industry, etc. as 
flowing from itself. But as a matter of fact when such work is transformed into 



the nature of devotion, i.e., service of God, science, society, industry, etc., are 
rendered even more glorious and progressive. 

The view that material extinction is the proper object of life is held by the 
philosophical schools of Buddhism and Jainism. The genesis of the view 
is supplied by the fact that material pleasure is essentially trivial and is not 
genial company for a spiritual being. The experience of this gives rise to the 
theory that all existence is misery. It is a significant fact that the ordinary, 
Buddhist of today, at any rate in Burma, is not a pessimist. He believes that God 
exists eternally, that He has created the world. It is He who appeared in this 
world as the Buddha and always exists as God in Heaven. Men will go to 
Heaven by doing good works and by following the rules laid down by the 
Buddha This is not the Buddhistic theory of the schools. In fact these pessimistic 
views, that have been adumbrated with so much subtlety of argumentation, are 
never accepted as common property by the Society. They are bound to remain 
locked up in books and in the minds of their teachers. The general population, if 
at any time they happen to pride themselves as the followers of these views, do 
so under the impression that those views are identical with their own 
cherished Opinions which, as have been pointed out above, are nothing but 
the spontaneous concomitants of human nature. Love of Humanity as the object 
of life, as propounded by Comte, worship of God under the name of the 
Nonantecedent, a constituent part of his fruitive works, as devised by Jaimini, 
the theory of material extinction propagated by Sakya Singha, all of these are 
bound to be reduced by the general body of their respective practising followers 
to one common form, viz., that of the religion that is natural to man. To 
this consummation they are tending even at the present moment The pessimists 
of western countries come under this category. There is no such thing as re-birth 
according to these Western pessimists whose theory may be described as the 
view of material extinction as the desired end of human life which itself is 
limited to one single birth. The Buddhist and Jain Schools agree in holding 
material extinction as the proper end of human life attainable through a cycle of 
births and re-births. 

According to Buddha the jiva can attain final extinction (parinirvana) as the 
result of long practice of gentleness, patience, forgiveness, 
kindness, unselfishness, meditation, renunciation and friendliness. There is 
complete cessation of existence on the attainment of ultimate extinction 
(parinirvana). After ordinary extinction (nirvana) existence as kindness persists. 



The Jains maintain that in accordance with the stage of advancement of the jiva 
due to the exercise of all the good qualities under the lead of kindness 
and renunciation he attains successively to the conditions of Narada, a 
Mahadeva, a Vasudeva, a Para-Vasudeva and finally the state of the Divinity 
involved in total material extinction. 

According to both Buddhists and Jains the material world is eternal. Work which 
is without a beginning has an end. Existence is misery. Utter 
extinction (parinirvana) is happiness. The system of fruitive works propounded 
by Jaimini is harmful for the jiva. The rules that ensure utter extinction 
(parinirvana) are alone productive of good Indra and other gods although they 
are the masters of fruitive workers are the servants of those who follow the path 
of utter extinction (parinirvana). 

Schopenhauer and Hartmann are material extinctionists admitting a single birth. 
According to Schopenhauer extinction is attainable by renouncing the desire for 
existence, by, voluntary abnegation (tyag), humility, acceptance of physical 
suffering, moral purity and asceticism (vairagya). According to Hartmann it is 
not necessary to undergo any suffering. Extinction is easy of attainment after 
death. Herr Bensa has demonstrated the impossibility of extinction by asserting 
the eternal nature of misery. 

Most of the followers of current monism are material extinctionists. One section 
of the monists hopes for the spiritual bliss of the Brahman after extinction; the 
other section accepting the extinction of all existence after death, does not admit 
any other form of bliss. It is these latter whom I have classed as material 
extinctionists. 

In the theory of material extinction the specific nature of the jiva is left 
uncertain. All these speculations are altogether atheistical. These views 
having been put forward with the object of preventing the oppressions by 
the exponents of material fruitive works could he propagated with such 
great vigour by the enthusiasm and perseverance of their preachers. In India 
on account of the oppression practiced on the Kshatriyas and the other varnas 
by the Brahmanas in course of the latter's efforts to further the establishment 
of the godless creed of fruitive works and the universal supremacy of 
the Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas handed together for the promulgation of 
the Buddhist, and the Vaishyas similarly combined to spread the Jain creed. 
When the factious spirit is reinforced by the clash of worldly interests it operates 



with great vigour. The Buddhist and Jain views were propagated in India in this 
way. In those countries into which those views were subsequently imported 
they were accepted as God-sent due to the absence of a stronger critical faculty 
in the peoples of those countries. It is a matter of history that the 
modern professors of material extinctionism in Europe, were led to propagate 
those views by their hatred of the Christian religion. 

According to the Tantric view the whole world including the Chit and achit has 
been created by an eternal power named Maya. When the zeal of 
Buddhist preachers cooled down due to the barrenness of the philosophy of their 
creed there was an attempt to rehabilitate those doctrines in a new garb. It is at 
this stage that the Buddhist idea was transformed into the Tantric and the 
new theory known as Mayavada was propounded. This cult of Maya passed 
under the name of Buddhism inside that religion. This subtle form of Buddhism 
under the separate designation of Mayavada spread rapidly among the non- 
Buddhist populations. We have the genesis of the illusionist Vedantists when the 
cult of Maya assumed the form of a philosophy resting on Vedic interpretation. 
The same cult obtained currency among the hill tribes as Maya-Sakti- 
Vada conforming to the Tantra Shastras. The Tantric view according to many 
is derived from the Sankhya Philosophy of Kapila. But the latter is the 
progenitor of the Saiva cult in which physical Nature occupies an honoured 
position which may have been the cause of the mistaken view that assigns, to the 
Tantric cult its Sankhya origin. In the Tantra physical Nature is the mother of 
the conscious principle but these two are co-ordinate in the Sankhya philosophy. 
A form of extinction in the shape of absorption into physical Nature has also 
been imagined. The worshippers of the power of physical Nature 
sometimes supplicate her in imitation of the manner in which the professors of 
the principle of self-conscious power express the thoughts of their minds 
in addressing God (vide Holbach). 

In the Mahanirvana-Tantra Mahadeva in praying to the principal power Adya 
Sakti Kali, addresses her in one passage as the creator of the world by the will 
of Para-Brahma. This corresponds to Sankhya. But in other passages she 
is described as alone existing in the form of chaos (tamas) after dissolution of 
the cosmos (pralaya) ; and she is also declared to be identical with the 
selfconscious principle in the jiva. All this is directly opposed to the Sankhya 
view. It cannot be said that the Sakti-vada of the Tantras originated from 
any philosophical system in particular. In fact the Tantra is so full of 
selfcontradiction that it does not admit of any systematic consideration. 



The distinctive Tantric processes, viz., the lata .sadhana, the panchamakara 
sadhana, sura sadhana, etc., do not appear to have been derived from any 
theistic philosophical system. Tantric (Saktivada) doctrine of supremacy of 
material power cannot be considered to be very different in character from the 
worship of the non-antecedent or god as mental formula (mantram) of atheistic 
fruitive works and the worship of physical Nature devised by Comte, etc. 

There are a few scholars who admit the existence of nothing except mental ideas. 
They hold that the objective world has no real existence. Ideas are the only 
entities. The soul that is held by others as the subjective reality, is 
also ineffective. There is really nothing except ideas. Bishop Berkeley and a 
few others are more or less of this opinion. It is they who have given the view 
the name of Idealism. 

Mill has also admitted this view to a certain extent. Idealism should not be 

regarded as identical with spiritualism. Idealism is merely the 

mental contemplation of material objects perceived through the senses. 

Such contemplation establishes the connection of the principle of self- 
consciousness with physical Nature. It is not essentially different from matter. 
Idealism is, therefore, by no means outside materialism. Among the 
undifferentiating monists a few have held that there are no such things as God or 
any substantive cosmic entities, but it is only the ideas of them that have 
existence and that it is the idea that is the undifferentiated truth. This view is 
altogether trivial. Its professors never acted up to their principles. Idealism 
should logically be classed under materialism. 

There is a certain class of people who argue that what is supposed to exist, does 
not really exist. All entities are impermanent and they belong to the category 
of the non-existent as soon as they undergo transformation or 
destruction. Therefore, the non-existent is the eternal and true. This opinion has 
no substance. Such sophistical argument is advanced by a class of deluded 
people who are especially fond of indulging in abstruse futile hair-splitting. 

That the non-existent is true is a proposition that carries its own refutation. From 
such abstruse speculations has arisen a body of opinions which is known in the 
English language as Skepticism, supported by Hume and a few 
others. Skepticism, although in itself it is inconclusive and unnatural, was at one 
time welcomed by people and also accepted in practice. The doctrines of 
selfish material pleasure and material extinction give rise to so much mischief in 



the world that men came to entertain a great contempt even for the very name 
of such religion. The nature of man is pure and endowed with the tendency, 
of devotion to God. It never finds joy in materialism. Skepticism is nothing 
but the last desperate attempt of the human reason to break its chains by its 
own strength after it is banished by materialism to the dungeon of ignorance 
and finds its hands and feet heavily fettered with chains of iron. 

It was attempted to be established by rank materialism that matter is eternal and 
that matter alone is true. Many echoed the views of Huxley that no matter what 
the event may be unless it is affirmed to be the transformation of material causes 
it is not a scientific proposition. Nothing can be proved except matter and that 
which sets it in motion. The principles of cognition and feeling, it was affirmed, 
will be altogether discarded by the Scriptures in the long run. The soul will be 
steadily submerged under the rising tide of materialism. Freedom will be put into 
bondage by the dead hand of Providence. It was when a numerous body, of men 
were arguing in this immoral strain that the nature of man feeling its own 
degradation made an attempt to direct its reason along a different track. 
Disregarding all the evil consequences of this new effort, being determined to 
destroy the materialistic theory at all costs, human reason gave birth to 
Skepticism. The evil in the form of materialism was undoubtedly got rid of but 
Skepticism did even more harm to theism than what it prevented. People began 
to suspect that we cannot find the real truth. We can only experience the qualities 
of objects. Where is the proof that even this experience is True? By means of the 
senses we perceive different qualities separately. As for instance we perceive 
colour by the eye, sound by the ear, smell by the nose, touch by the skin and 
taste by the tongue. The knowledge of the object is obtained by means of the 
aggregate of the qualities imbibed severally through the five channels of such 
knowledge. We would have obtained the knowledge in a different form if instead 
of five we had ten additional senses. Under the circumstances whatever 
knowledge we happen to possess is wholly tentative and doubtful. By such 
Skepticism although materialism was destroyed, spiritualism did not profit in 
any way. Skepticism admits unreservedly the real existence of objects. What it 
asserts is that we do not possess any knowledge of the real nature of objects as 
our knowledge is imperfect, and also that we have no means of having the 
requisite kind of knowledge. Skepticism destroys itself in as much as it admits 
the undoubted existence of the reality. If there is such a thing as Absolute Reality 
Skepticism is left no ground to stand upon. On a careful consideration 
Skepticism appears to be meaningless jargon. Who is it that doubts that I exist? 
—I myself? Therefore, I exist. 



All these three views, viz., materialism or the doctrine of material power, 
idealism and Skepticism are forms of atheism that have existed from 
ancient times. These include all possible varieties of atheism. We have arrived at 
the conclusion after careful enquiry that the claims of the atheists of recent times 
to be propounders of original views, are untenable in every case. They 
always express only the old views under a different name and garb. Many 
systems of philosophy have been promulgated in this country. Of these Sankhya, 
Naya, Vaishesika and Karltlanlimansa are professedly atheistical. Patanjala and 
the pseudo monistic interpretation of Vedanta, are veiled forms of atheism. We 
can, in this place, only bestow a passing glance at them. 

Sankhya philosophical system: —God cannot be proved.— “ Isvarasidheh ” 1— 
92. If God is admitted He must be either free 

or dependent“Muktabaddhayorantyatrarabhavanna Tatsidhih” 1—93. Free God 
is unrealizable. Dependent God has not the quality of Godship. Bijnana 
Bhikshu commenting on this says that the following is, therefore, said in regard 
to the particular passages of the Scriptures bearing on God, “ that they are 
merely eulogistic of the free soul or in praise of the successful pursuit of 
religious activities. God does not really exist”, “muktatmanah 
prasamsha upasasiddhasyava, 1—96. This much for Sankhya. 

The System ofNayaya philosophy: —It is made by Goutama. Goutama says that 
there are sixteen entities, “pramana-prameya ....nihshreyashadhigamah ”. 

The state of the highest good (nihshreyah) of Goutama is unintelligible. It 
appears as if the good of the jiva is attained if he can prevail in argument. God 
does not find a place among his sixteen entities. It is for this reason that the 
Vedas says that the natural inclination to God should not be allowed to be 
obsessed by casuistical argument. Goutama also notices the principle of evil. 
“Duhkha-janmapravritti-dosa-mith-yajnana 

namuttaraottarapaye tadanantarapayadapavargah. ” Deliverance (mukti) is 
regarded in a general way as the cessation of extreme misery. According to 
Goutama there is no joy in the state of deliverance. Therefore, there is absolutely 
no such thing as Divine bliss. Whence the Nyava Shastra made by Goutama, is 
opposed to the Vedas. Vaishesika philosophy made by Kanada: —This system 
does not call for any elaborate discussion. If we consider the original .sutras 
made by Kanada himself we do not find any eternal God therein. Certain authors 
of this school have made an attempt to divest their system of its God-less-ness 
by naming as supersoul (paramatma) a principle under the entity ‘embodied’ 
(dehi) which is one of the seven entities. But scholars such as Sankaracharya, 



etc., in their respective commentaries on the Vedanta-sutra, have stated as their 
conclusion that the Kanada-doctrine is non-Vedic and godless. As a matter of 
fact it is found that those who do not admit that God is the Supreme Master 
without any reservation, even though the word God be found in their systems, 
are really atheists. It is the Nature of God that He must be recognized as the Lord 
of all entities. The view which admits the existence of eternal entities on a 
footing of equality with God, is atheistical Karma mimansa: —Jaimini is the 
author of the original sutras of this system. He makes no mention of God. His 
premier subject is dharma. “Chodana lakshanortho dharmah. Karmaike tatra 
darshanat. ” The meaning conveyed by the Vedas is dharma. Its name is karma 
(work). His commentator Sabaraswami writes in this connection as follows: 
Katham punaridamavagamyate? Asti tadapurmam. ’ How is this to be known? 
Therefore, there must be an entity which bears the name of ‘previously 
nonexistent’ (apurva). When work is performed something previously non¬ 
existent is thereby manifested which awards the fruit. Where is the necessity of a 
god for bestowing the fruits of actions? What more is there that could have been 
said by modern atheists such as Comte, etc.? 

Vedanta: —The Vedanta philosophy supports in every devotion to God. In its 
commentaries dishonest thinkers have interpolated veiled Buddhistic 
thought under the garb of non distinctive monism. But saintly persons have 
shown the good path to the people of the world by composing with great care 
proper commentaries of the original sutras. We shall consider the futility of 
monism in another place. 

Yoga: —The shastra made by Patanjali Rishi bears the name of Yoga-Shastra. 

The following sutra is embodied in the chapter on method of the 
Shastra: “Klesakarma-bipakashayairaparamristah purusavisesha Isvarah. 

Tatra niratisayam sarvajnyavijam. Sha purbesamapi guruh 
kalenanavachhedat. ” The being capable of taking the initiative untroubled by 
tribulations in the four forms of misery, work, consequence (bipaka), subject 
(asraya) bears the name of god. In him is located the seed of extreme 
omniscience. He is the preceptor of all the people that have gone before, in as 
much as he is uninterrupted by time. This statement of the subject of Godhead in 
this system has led many to think that Patanjali is really a devotee of God. But 
one who has read the Patanjali Yoga Shastra to its conclusion with special care 
and judgment, cannot be so mistaken. In the Kaivalyapad occurs the principle 
“Purusartha-sunyanam pratiprashavah kaivalyam svarupapratistha. va 
chitisaktriti,” which is thus explained in the Bhojabritti: 



“Chichhaktervrittisharupyanivrittou svarupamanam tat kaivalyamuchyate. ” The 
non-alternative state (kaivalya) is the name of the existence of the cognitive 
principle in its own proper condition. The point that requires to be considered in 
this connection is this, viz., what is meant by The proper condition of the 
cognitive principle’? That is to say, whether the jiva who has attained the non¬ 
alternative state (kaivalya) will have any function? After the jiva has attained the 
non-alternative state (kaivalya) what will be his relation with the god of his 
unrealized state? In the said Shastra there is unfortunately no answer to this 
question. On repeated reading of this Shastra one is convinced that its god of the 
state of unrealized effort, is a kind of entity that is conceived merely for the 
success of worship. He is not to be found in the realized state. Can such Shastra 
be considered as theistic? 

All these atheistical opinions have been preached in this as well as other 
countries under different names due to difference of language. 

Reason is of two kinds, viz, pure reason and adulterated reason. The faculty of 
the soul in its pure state that applies itself to the examination of the 
selfconscious, may be described as pure reason. It is without defect and is 
a function which is natural to the soul. The perverted form of the above 
faculty due to association with the material principle that is found to guide the 
soul when she is engrossed in matter, is the adulterated reason. This adulterated 
or pseudo-reason is of two kinds, viz., (1) alloyed with fmitive works (karma- 
misra,’ and (2) allied with empiric knowledge (jnana-misra). It is also 
called sophistry (tarka). It is this which is condemnable for the reason that 
there happens to be present in it the following defect, viz., error (bhrama), 
delusion ( pramada.), deceit (bipralipsa) and inefficiency of the organs 
(karanapatava). Its decision is defective in all cases. That which is established 
by the real reason is the same in all cases. The opinions that are produced by the 
adulterated reason are diverse and mutually conflicting. By acting in accordance 
with those opinions the incarcerated jiva. earns only the bondage of ignorance as 
the fruit of such procedure. 

Adulterated reason owes its origin to the operation of matter. The material 
picture which the individual soul, imprisoned in matter, receives in the 
first instance by means of the senses, is carried to the brain by the nervous 
process. The reason then goes to work on these pictures that are preserved in the 
brain by the process of memory. This activity gives rise to various concoctions 
and abstractions. The term ‘scientific knowledge’ is applied to the beauty that 



is perceived by the assortment of those pictures. By the processes of analysis 
and synthesis those pictures are made to yield hues in the form of 
secondary conclusions. This is called reasoning. Comte said, “Assort that which 
has been observed and from it investigate the truth”. 

Let us now consider whether the reason which is brought to bear on the pictures 
that have been obtained originally and exclusively from the material world can 
be designated as reason born of matter. How is one to know about super-material 
objects and their qualities through this process? If there happens to exist any 
super-material entity there must, therefore, also necessarily exist for the 
realization of the same some process that is suitable for such purpose. That those 
who are not acquainted with this higher process, or do not like to be acquainted 
with it due to prejudice, adopting the reason that is based on matter, will speak 
the language of delirium, admits of no doubt. In those cases in which the 
investigation of the material world happens to be the sole endeavour the reason 
that stands on matter yields the best results. This adulterated reason is specially 
effective in all forms of material affairs such as arts, bodily activities, warfare, 
music, etc., etc. In the first place adulterated reason in alliance with empiric 
knowledge, arrives at certain decisions and subsequently joining hands with 
fruitive work completes them by carrying them out in practice. When the affair 
of the railway was first settled in the mind of a materialist scholar, his reason 
was at that time alloyed with empiric knowledge. When it was reduced to 
practice the reason becoming imbued with fruitive work applied itself to the 
work of manufacture. Works such as the industries, etc., are as a matter of fact 
the proper subject of the adulterated reason. Supermaterial entities are not its 
legitimate subject and’ therefore, its application to them is not practicable. 
Super-material reason is in a position to act only in the case of super-material 
entities. Materialism, the theory of material force, material extinctionism, 
idealism,—all these systems, adopting the reason that is dependent on matter for 
the purpose of investigating the cause of the world which happens to be super¬ 
material, could necessarily obtain no satisfaction. This was so because the 
process they adopted for the purpose happened to be quite ridiculous. All the 
books that have been written by them are, therefore, merely the meaningless 
utterances of delirious persons. Although the real reason happens to be the 
natural faculty of the soul yet the soul that is encased in matter, under the heavy 
pressure of the load of matter for making it the exclusive subject of his 
contemplation, shows greater honour to adulterated reason. Hence most people 
of this world are upholders of the mixed reason. The super-material unalloyed 
reason is very rare. Those alone who through good fortune are actively disposed 



to serve the introspective faculty, are acquainted with the greatness of pure 
reason or spontaneous exclusiveness (sahaja samadhi). From a remote antiquity 
the world with a superficial vision paying honour to adulterated reason, had been 
hoping to obtain from itself its own realization. All the different views which 
were propounded by such reason, although they are at first accepted by it 
with cordiality, prove unsatisfactory to itself in the long run. But the reason 
even when it is limited or mixed, cannot be without relation to the soul. At times 
it tries to do good to the soul. When after having brought forth the long series 
of heterogeneous views and talked deliriously in many different ways 
the adulterated reason could obtain no satisfaction it developed a feeling 
of contempt for itself. It began to cry deliriously. It said, ‘Alas, how am 
I abandoning my nature by straying far away from the soul to whom I 
am eternally joined, having been occupied in such superficial activities!’ 
Lamenting in this way, weighed down with fear, it admits, when it happens to be 
on its last legs, God as the Source of all activities. At this stage the human mind 
proclaims to all countries that God is realizable by the adulterated reason. In this 
mood Udayanacharya wrote his work, the Kusmanjali. In England the opinions 
that are promulgated under the names of Deism and Natural Theology should 
be recognized as meeting the approval of those people who profess those 
opinions by reason of their being in the above-mentioned condition. The 
theistic principle that is established by the process of adulterated reasoning, 
is extremely imperfect and, in regard to the reality, is both foreign and 
incomplete ; because the theistic conception that is brought about by reason in 
alliance with matter, is a specific and limited idea, viz., that God is the mere 
cause of matter. It is artificial in as much as there is in it no real advancement 
towards the spiritual state proper, no direct activity of the soul nor any 
investigation of the Reality. This will appear later in its proper place. 

Such delirious mixed reason, even after admitting God, is unable to establish the 
unity of God on account of materialistic errors. Sometimes it supposes God to be 
a dual entity. Thereupon in their judgment the spiritual principle appears as one 
god and the material principle as another god. The god, whose nature 
is imagined to be spiritual, is supposed to be the source of good. The god as 
the material principle, is opined as the cause of all evil. A certain scholar who 
bore the name of Jaradvastra, in his work the Zendavesta, admitted the dual 
nature of the divine principle in recognition of the eternity of the two gods, as 
the evil and the good principle respectively. Theistically disposed persons 
showed their contempt for him by designating him as the rotten interpreter 
( jaran-mimansaka). This designation is retained even to this day, having been 



applied subsequently in connection with all superficial persons of the schools of 
fruitive work and empiric knowledge. Jaradvastra is an ancient scholar. His 
view received no support in India but spread successfully in Iran. Becoming 
infective his view produced, in the religion of the Jews and subsequently among 
the followers of the Koran, Satan as the rival of God. About the time 
when Jaradvastra was preaching his view of two gods, the necessity for three 
gods being recognized among the Jews the doctrine of the Trinity was 
originated. In the Trinitarian view at first the three gods were conceived as 
separate from one another; and subsequently, when this appeared unsatisfactory 
to the scholars, they elicited the inter-connection among them by the elaboration 
of the theological principles represented by God, the Holy Ghost and 
Christ respectively. In the particular Age or Sect in which Brahma, Vishnu and 
Siva are conceived as different gods the unsatisfactory circumstance of similar 
belief in three gods occurred also in India. Scholars having established the 
theoretical unity of those three gods, have incorporated in many parts of the 
Shastras advice discountenancing their separate existence. In different countries 
there is also found to exist belief in many gods. Specially in very backward 
countries monothism in a pure form is not found to prevail. At one time it was 
the practice to regard the gods, such as Indr a, Chandra, Vayu, Varuna, etc., 
as mutually independent. The school of the mimmansakas 
(interpretationists) correcting the above view subsequently established a single 
god, viz., Brahma. All this is mere delirious utterances of reason deluded by 
matter. God is one entity. Had He been more than one the world would have 
never functioned in a beautiful manner. Different laws in conformity with 
different wills in mutual conflict, would have undoubtedly wrecked the world. 
That this visible universe has issued from the will of one powerful person, 
cannot be denied by any person who feels the impulse of goodness. 

The reasoning that is generated by the spontaneous cognition of the soul, is alone 
pure and free from defect. The Truth that is elucidated by such reasoning, is 
alone real. Reasoning can have no existence apart from instinctive knowledge. 
The reasoning associated with the knowledge of external Nature, that is noticed 
in the affairs of this world, is impure or mixed. The truths that are declared by 
the mixed reason, are all of a trivial character. Even if it establishes God its 
argument is never satisfactory. There is no applicability of the pervert reason to 
the case of the Absolute Truth. All conclusions regarding the Absolute reached 
by the pure reason on the basis provided by intuitive knowledge, are true. It may 
be asked in this connection what intuitive knowledge is. The soul is self- 
conscious and is, therefore, all knowledge. The knowledge that naturally exists 



in the soul is spontaneous or intuitive knowledge. Intuitive knowledge is 
eternally cognate to the soul. It is not produced by any process of material 
experience. Pure reasoning is the name for a certain process of such intuitive 
knowledge. Intuitive knowledge is ascertainable by the fact that the jiva has the 
following realization from before the generation of any experience of the 
material world, viz. 

(1) I exist. 

(2) I shall continue to exist. 

(3) I have joy. 

(4) There is a great entity that underlies and maintains my joy 

(5) It is my nature to depend on the support of this entity. 

(6) I am eternally guided by this entity. 

(7) This support is extremely beautiful. 

(8) I have no power of abandoning this support. 

(9) My present state is lamentable. 

(10) I ought to follow again my guide and support, giving up this 
miserable condition. 

(11) This world is not my eternal dwelling-place. 

(12) By the progress of this world My eternal improvement is not secured. 

Unless the reason adopts such intuitive knowledge it merely continues to wander 
deliriously. There also exist certain axiomatic truths in the domain of spiritual 
science. No spiritual progress is possible unless these are accepted and followed. 

There is a certain class of people who cannot form a settled opinion of their own 
after accepting pure intuitive knowledge and yet do not trust reason in all cases. 
Admitting intuitive knowledge to a certain extent they recognize oneness of 
God. Absorbed in knowledge they attain the exclusive state. But 



this exclusiveness is not the natural state of samadhi in as much as it 
exhibits abstruseness of thought. By such abstruse thinking even after piercing 
through this gross world they fail to obtain the vision of the spiritual world 
because the natural Truth does not manifest Himself without spontaneous 
exclusiveness. Having observed the symbolic world they feel as if they have 
seen the ultimate abiding-place of the jiva. In reality they only stand on the 
symbol of the material world. The difference between the symbolic world and 
material world consists in this that the material world is apprehensible by the 
senses. The symbolic world is apprehensible by the mind. The symbolic world is 
merely the subtle initial stage of the material world. The material world is of two 
kinds, viz., (I) the very gross material world, and (2) the subtler world full of 
light. 

The astral body that the Theosophists talk about, is the lighted material body. 

The symbolic body is subtler than the astral; that is to say, it is mental. 

The subtle world that is full of the manifestations of power, according to 
the Pantanjala Shastra and the opinion of Buddhist ascetics, is the symbolic 
world. The spiritual entity is different from these. The non-alternative kaivalya) 
state described in the Pantanjala Shastra, is merely the idea of the state that is 
the opposite of the gross and the subtle, but shows no trace of any investigation 
of the spiritual Truth. No one can Say what the relation of Godhead is to the 
jiva after his attainment of the non-alternative state (kaivalya), or about 
the whereabouts or the nature of God in the non-alternative ( kaivalya ) 
state, although a god is met with during the pre-realization stage of such 
endeavour. 

If the jiva on attainment of the non-alternative state (kaivalya) merge with God 
then as a matter of fact it is monism. The Yogashastra, whether it is 
Theosophy or Patanjali, is not for the eternal benefit of jiva. Yogashastra is one 
of the numerous blind lanes that are found to exist between the grossest 
materialism at one end and spiritual Truth at the other. And, therefore, it yields 
no satisfaction to the jiva who is in quest of spiritual bliss. 

Some hold that God has made this world for our enjoyment. We obtain the grace 
of God by religious merit earned in course of sinless enjoyment of this world. It 
may be objected to this that if this world had been made for yielding happiness 
to the jiva, God would not make it so imperfect. God has to be blamed for 
making it so imperfect if we assume that this world was intended by Him for our 
happiness. If His purpose in creating the world had been to teach us to be 



religious it would undoubtedly have been made differently because at present all 
persons of this world cannot attain to religion. 


Holders of the opposite view say that this world is intended for the punishment 
of the jiva for offense committed by him. Being unable to find an 
adequate answer to the question how the jiva could commit offense a certain 
explanation has found a place in several religious systems to the following 
effect. God having created the first jiva permitted him to live in a pleasant wood 
in company of his wife. He forbade them to eat of the fruit of the tree 
of knowledge. The first parents of mankind by the advice of a certain fallen 
jiva having eaten the forbidden fruit, were expelled from the happy region for 
the offense of disobedience to God and fell into this world which is so full 
of misery. For this offense of the first parents all these jivas were born sinful. 

As the offense could not be expiated by the jivas themselves a certain being, who 
is like one limb of God, being born among men in the likeness of man, chose 
to suffer death by taking upon his own shoulders the sin of all jivas, who 
would follow him. Those jivas who followed him thereby easily earned 
their deliverance while those who did not follow him were cast into the eternal 
hell. It is not possible to comprehend with the normal understanding how 
other jivas can be excused by the punishment of God becoming jiva. 

According to the above the jiva exists as jiva from birth to death. The jiva, 
therefore, did not exist before birth and, after death also, the jiva would have 
no existence in this sphere of his work. Moreover man alone is meant by jiva. 
Jiva cannot in the circumstances be a spiritual principle. He is to be conceived 
as created in matter by accident or by the will of God. Why the jiva appears 
in different periods and in different circumstances, is not understood. Why 
should not other animals be counted among the jivas? Why should birds and 
beasts be anterior to man? It is incomprehensible to those who obey God how it 
can be the dispensation of God, Who is full of mercy, that man should earn 
eternal heaven or suffer eternal damnation merely for his acts done in a single 
birth. Those who belong to this School cannot serve God in any unselfish way. 
They cultivate the arts and sciences under the belief that God Can be pleased by 
one's attempt to improve the world. But they remain ever ignorant of pure 
devotion to God which is free from all impulses of worldly work and knowledge. 
The service of God from a sense of duty can never be disinterested or natural. 
That we shall serve God because He has been merciful to us, is a mean 
conception, because it implies that we would not have served Him if He had not 
been kind to us. We also cherish the immoral hope of future favours. If God 



were considered as merciful for His bestowal of devotion it would not have 
been objectionable in any way. In these religions such a statement is not to be 
found. The mercy of God in this case only refers to the conveniences and 
happiness incidental to the worldly life. 

In this and other analogous creeds of a recent origin God is formless and 
allpervasive. The pursuit of knowledge is the chief work of such systems. The 
consideration arising from empiric knowledge that God is lowered if 
considered to have a form, constantly troubles their minds. God, according to 
this view, must be formless and all-pervasive because we have created Him such 
by our knowledge and He cannot be anything else than this. This conception of 
God degenerates into a form of idolatry that is straitly circumscribed by 
materialistic considerations. The sky that is found in matter is also all-pervasive 
and formless. The God of this School is like it. This is matter-worship. 

The expressions used in the prayers and hymns of praise, which are the only 
forms of worship in these creeds, are also altogether worldly. Those who hold 
this view are generally self-sufficient. They keep aloof even from good 
preceptors through fear lest such association may impart superstitions. Some 
even hold that as the truth is inherent in the soul it can be realized by one’s 
own independent efforts, and that, therefore, there is no necessity for submission 
to a preceptor. Some opine that it is sufficient to accept the supreme Teacher. 

God is the supreme Preceptor and Saviour. He destroys our sinful tendencies 
by entering into our proper selves. There is no necessity for any human 
preceptor. Some of them regard as God-given a certain book which is a 
compilation from different sources. Others do not admit the authority of any 
book through fear lest by recognizing the authority of any Scriptures errors are 
admitted. 

Although according to this view only there is only one God yet it is in many 
parts inconsistent, full of insinuations of partiality against God and of no value to 
jivas who are naturally disposed towards God. Instead of admitting a principle of 
evil existing separately from God it considers the commission of sin as due to 
the weakness of jivas for which also, as this view offers no other explanation. 
God is tacitly held to be ultimately responsible. In the pride of empiric 
knowledge they fail to grasp the difference between soul and mind. Their 
spiritual science is stunted in its growth on account of arrogance engendered by 
their superior knowledge of the physical sciences. Their spiritual knowledge is 
so meager that they cannot distinguish between the spiritual principle and the 
material principle in gross and subtle forms. They accordingly mistake the 



symbolic for the spiritual. 


From a long time a body of opinions bearing the name of advaita-vada (monism) 
has been current in this country. This opinion is born of study of the Vedas under 
the lead of narrow partisan bias. Although monism has also been preached by 
many scholars outside India yet there seems to be little doubt that this view 
spread originally to other countries from India. A few savants who accompanied 
Alexander the Great into India, made the thorough acquaintance of it. This has 
been hinted by authors of Greece and Rome in their own works. According to 
advaita-vada the Brahman is the only entity. There is not and has never been any 
second entity besides the Brahman. Distinctions such as spirit, matter and God 
are due to conventional judgment. As a matter of fact the Brahman is the 
unchanged cause of all cognisable principles. The Brahman is eternal, without 
change, without form and without differentiation. In the Brahman there is no 
adjunct, no kind of power and no kind of activity. There is no change of state or 
transformation of the Brahman. All these expressions are to be found in different 
parts of the Vedas. The professors of the monistic cult of the Brahman adopted 
these statements without any objection, But when they turned their eyes towards 
the differentiated world, they began to reflect how such Brahman can be the 
cause of the world. Whence came the world ? Unless this was explained the 
view which appealed to their tastes could not be rendered tenable. Arrived at this 
point they began to think, and numerous issues were soon brought to light that 
clamoured for solution. How can activity or the active power be admitted to the 
Brahman which is without activity in any form? On the other hand caution was 
necessary lest monism suffered any curtailment by the admission of a second 
principle. Thinking on in this manner they first of all came to the conclusion that 
there would be no violation of the monistic principle if a slight power of 
transformation in the Brahman were admitted. The Brahman is the 
transformation of itself. This transformation is cognisable. Those monists who 
considered such admission as inconsistent with the monistic position, proposed 
to account for the world by the assumption of deception or illusion (vivarta) due 
to want of true knowledge; just as a stick may be mistakenly supposed to be a 
snake. The world is unreal, a mere illusory idea. There is no world, no life. The 
Brahman exists and there also exists an illusion in the shape of the knowledge of 
the world. The names ‘avidya’ (nescience) ‘maya 5 (illusion) etc. arose out of the 
effort to understand this deception thoroughly. A deception is never a real, 
separate entity. Therefore, there is no infringement of the conclusion of monism 
that the reality is only one. After this extraneous knowledge is subdued by the 
knowledge of the Reality the apparent illusion is destroyed with the realization 



of one entity, resulting in emancipation (mukti).Yet another body of scholars 
refused to consider the theory of illusion as being altogether true. They said that 
the world is not a piece of self evident deception. The illusion of the world owes 
its maintenance to another hallucination, viz., the jiva or individual soul. The 
jiva is not a separate entity from the Brahman. This would be an infringement of 
the monistic principle. The jiva is the real illusion. These scholars are divided 
into two groups. One of those held the view that the Brahman is like the great 
sky appearing as jiva due to limitation like the portion of the great sky 
enclosed within the pot. The other section thought this would be too great a 
tampering with the Brahman, and necessitate His subordination to illusion. 
Instead of doing this let the jiva be recognized as the reflection of the Brahman 
like the image of the moon in the water. Being itself a false entity full of a 
deceptive cognition in the way of the natural function of the principle of 
nescience the jiva soul imagines this world as made up of matter. In reality the 
Brahman is one and without a second. The jiva is not a separate entity. The 
world also is not anything that has a separate existence from the Brahman. 

The great error of these scholars, which they can neither see nor want to see, is 
their assumption that the Brahman is only one admitting of the existence of 
no second entity, and that there is no other real thing separate from the 
Brahman. So long as the inconceivable power of the same Brahman is not 
admitted all the above speculations are bound to be trivial. Is the powerless 
Brahman proved to be one by the postulation of illusion by one, of ‘nescience’ 
by another, of ‘deception’ by a third and of ‘the deception of a deception’ by yet 
another school ? In all these views the abandonment of the monistic position is 
easily recognizable. The conception of the Brahman possessed of inconceivable 
power, is an infinitely greater idea than that of the powerless Brahman. Neither 
does the former necessitate the postulation of an entity foreign to the Brahman 
for the purpose of preserving His so called unity. Monism fails utterly 
to comprehend and harmonize all the statements of the Vedas and is equally- 
powerless to promote the good of the jiva. We take leave of the subject 
of monism with these general observations for the present, reserving the 
specific consideration of the details of its numerous variants in connection with 
the teaching of Mahaprabhu when He refutes the fallacies of this view. 

All these are mere verbal juggleries or the mischievous prejudices of 
selfopinionated controversialists. The Truth exists buried in the midst of 
erroneous speculations. It is the office of the real investigator of Truth, on 
ascertaining the nature of the untruths, to discard them and by making the direct 



acquaintance with Truth to procure and treasure Him. Victor Cousin, the French 
savant, although he rightly hit the method, failed in its actual application, due to 
the fact that he employed himself in searching for the Absolute Truth in the piles 
of empiric learning. Such effort is like the endeavour to obtain the grain by 
the process of grinding the chaff. The real sifting has been done by Sree 
Vyasadeva in his Brahmasutra and elaborated by himself in the Sreemad 
Bhagavatam; and Sree Chaitanya Deva came into this world to make the religion 
set forth in the Sreemad Bhagavatam possible of attainment by the fallen jiva.. 

Enough has been said on atheistic speculations to prove that they have always 
exercised, and still continue to exercise, consciously or unconsciously to 
their victims, a most pernicious influence on the human mind and prevent it 
from giving even a hearing to the subject of the Absolute Truth. It was so in the 
Age of Sree Chaitanya Deva. The South of India was the official stronghold of 
all kinds of warring doctrines and it was the purpose of Sree Chaitanya in 
traveling through the South to meet and refute the fallacies of the atheistical 
scholars of the different schools and thereby destroy their sinister influence 
which prevented the general body- of the people from giving their 
unprejudiced attention to His teaching, 

The reader will get some idea of the chaotic state of religious opinion in India at 
the time of Sree Chaitanya Deva from the following brief sketch of the 
principal schools of philosophy whose views were more or less current in that 
Age. The more important of these have been compiled by Madhvacharya, a 
follower of Sankara’s monism, who preceded Sree Chaitanya Deva by about two 
centuries, in his work the Sarba-Darsana Sangraha which has been translated 
into English by E. B. Cowell. The systems mainly prevalent at the time of Sree 
Chaitanya Deva may be arranged in the following order:— 

(1) The system of Charvaka, opposed to the Vedas, hankering for things other 
than God,—a devoted admirer of worldly qualities,—atheistical. 

( 2 ) The system of the Buddhists who hold everything as transitory, worship 
worldly qualities, are atheistical, rely on abstruse and fallacious argument. 

(3) The system of the Jaina arhats, indeterminists, worship worldly 
qualities, rely- on abstruse and fallacious argument. 


(4) The system of Sankhya, godless, holds the soul as devoid of quality, 



relies on abstruse and fallacious argument. 


(5) The system of Patanjala, acknowledges a god, holds the soul as devoid 
of quality, relies on abstruse and fallacious argument. 

(6) The system of Sankara, averse to God, professing the aim of 
harmonizing conflicting opinions, pseudo-revelationist, pure monist, 
rationalistic. 

(7) The system of the Baiakaranas, materialists, pseudo revelationists, 
worship god conceived as possessed of worldly qualities. 

(8) The system of the Mimansakas, rely on the meaning of words, pseudo- 
revelationists, worship god who is conceived as possessing worldly qualities. 

(9) The system of the Naiyayikas, profess first beginning, process of effort 
and the unknown factor, recognize the authority and validity of evidence other 
than that of the Word of the Veda, worship god conceived as possessing 
mundane qualities. 

(10) The system of the Baisheshikas, profess first beginning, process of 
effort, the unknown factor, recognize no other authority than that of the 
Scriptures, worship god conceived as possessing mundane qualities. 

(11) The system of the tranquilized Saivas, profess worldly enjoyment, 
process of effort, the unknown factor, emancipation while still living in this 
world, rationalistic, worship god conceived as possessing mundane qualities, 
believe in God. 

(12) The system of the Pratyabhijnas, profess material enjoyment, process of 
effort, the unknown factor, hold emancipation on leaving the physical body, hold 
unity of the soul, worship god conceived as possessing mundane qualities. 

(13) The system of the Nakulish Pashupat Saivas, profess material 
enjoyment, process of effort, the unknown factor, hold souls to be separate, 
hold emancipation after leaving the body, believe in god as unrelated to 
fruitive work, worship god conceived as possessing mundane qualities. 

(14) The system of the Saivas, profess material enjoyment, process of effort, 
the 



unknown factor, hold emancipation as a bodiless state, hold souls as separate, 
believe in god as related to fruitive work, worship god conceived as 
possessing mundane qualities. 

Charvaka —holds the living body as identical with the soul and its satisfaction as 
the object of life. Direct perception is the only proof of reality. The highest good 
consists in the pleasures produced by enjoyment of women, eating of wholesome 
food and wearing the best apparel, etc. The pain that is incidental to these 
pleasures should be avoided as far as possible. But it would he foolish to forego 
the pleasure itself which is real for fear of the pain that may occasionally be 
associated with it. There is no after-life. Those eminently learned men 
who perform ceremonies enjoined by the Vedas at the cost of much wealth 
and physical discomfort are all deluded by the long-standing custom of obeying 
the Vedas, which were originally made by the hypocrite, the cunning knave and 
the cannibal taking counsel together. The Vedas are full of false, atrocious, 
immoral and ridiculous practices. 

Buddhism. —The Buddhists are divided into four schools, viz., the Madhyamikas, 
the Yogachariyas, the Sautranitikas and the Baibhasikas rendered by Cowell 
as Nihilists, Subjective Idealists, Representationists, and 
Presentationists, respectively. According to the first nothing exists except the 
void. In other words, nothing is really- true. If anything had been really true it 
would have been constantly perceivable in the waking state, in sleep and in 
dream. According to the second external objects are non-existent. The soul 
which is only momentary cognition, is alone true. The third school holds that 
external objects are true and realizable by inference. According to the 
Baibhasikas external objects are realizable by direct perception. According to all 
the schools the principal duty consists in worshipping this body by nourishing 
the twelve dimensions of which it is made, viz., the five active organs, the five 
perceptual organs and the two perceptuo-volitional organs of the mind and the 
faculty of discrimination. According to the Buddhists ‘Sugata’ is God, the world 
is momentarily perishable, direct perception and inference are the evidence; 
and misery, dimension, aggregate an(l the path are the four truths. The 
entity misery is constituted of its five limbs, viz., knowledge, pain, 
cognition, impression and colour. The twelve dimensions have already been 
mentioned. The attachments and repugnances that arise spontaneously in the 
hearts of men, are called the principle of aggregation. The fixed persuasion that 
all impressions are momentary, bears the name of the path. .Moksha 
or emancipation is identical with this last. 



Jainism The general term of the sect is arhat. The Jains are that sect of the arhats 
that follows the teachings of the Jina. The arhats refute the theory 
of momentariness of the Buddhists and admit the continuity and eternal 
existence of the soul. The body is the measure of the jiva. The Arhat is God. He 
is omniscient and free from attachment, repugnance, etc. The three jewels 
are right view, right knowledge, and right conduct. The right view consists of 
the right faith which is prevention of opposition or doubt regarding the 
truth declared by the Jina. The right knowledge consists of the knowledge of 
the truth declared by the Jina in a condensed or elaborate form. Right 
conduct consists in the abandonment of condemned activities. Right conduct is 
of five kinds, viz., not to kill any jiva whether it is locomotive or stationary, not 
to accept more than is given, not to steal, to speak words that are true, 
beneficial and also agreeable, to give up lust, anger, etc., and to avoid undue 
attachment for all things. These five constitute the great obligation. The highest 
state is attained by practicing these, They are ‘syad-vadins’ ie, believe in the 
doctrine of relativity, indefiniteness or indeterminateness, as opposed to the idea 
of the absolute. 

Sankhya .—The propounder of the Sankhya system of philosophy is Kapila. 
There are two Kapilas. Kapila, the son of Kardama and Devahuti, belongs to 
the Satya Yuga. He is the Kapila mentioned in the Sreemad Bhagavatam. His 
view, which is also known as Sankhya, is recorded in the Bhagavatam.. It 
contains many statements that refer to the system of pure devotion. He must be 
carefully distinguished from Kapila, the propounder of the atheistical view of the 
current Sankhya philosophy which is our present subject. The atheist Kapila was 
born of the Agni-family in the Treta Yuga.. 

According to the Sankhya there are really two fundamental entities, viz., the 
pradhana or prakrid (i.e., the material principle) and the purusha (i.e., the soul). 
Prakrid undergoes transformation. The purusha is an essence unaffected. The 
twenty-five entities of the Sankhya, from the enumeration of which the system 
derives its name, consist of primordial matter (mula prakrid), mahat, mistaken 
egoism (ahamkara) , the five subtle elements (panchatanmatrah), the five 
organs of sense, the five organs of action, the mind which is the organ of both 
sense and action, the five principles of gross matter and the soul (purusha). Of 
these the first is the pure essence of matter in the sense that it is not the effect of 
any other cause but is the cause of all the other material principles. The next 
groups in the series consisting of the seven categories from mahat to the five 
subtle elements, are related to one another as cause and effect each being the 



cause of the following entity. They are, therefore, both cause and effect. The five 
principles of gross matter are not the cause of any other entity. They are merely 
effect. Purusha or the soul is eternal and unchangeable. It is neither the cause nor 
the effect of anything. 

Primordial matter (prakriti) is constituted of the three qualities, viz., sattva, rajas 
and tamas. The state of equilibrium of these three qualities is prakriti. 

The qualities (gunas) are material and transformable. The whole world is 
the transformation of the qualities. The sattva quality is happiness itself, it is 
light and illuminating. Its function is equable (santa). The rajas quality is made 
of misery and is active. Its function is terrible (ghora). The quality of tamas 
is stupefying, it is heavy and suppressive. Its function is irrational (murha) 

. Although thus mutually, opposed they co-operate with one another and 
thus produce the world. The world is thus full of pleasure, pain and 
ignorance. Pleasure and pain are the qualities of the principle of discrimination 
(mahat or buddhi), i.e. of matter, and not of the soul. These qualities of the 
material intelligence are reflected in the soul. The soul is eternal, free from the 
material qualities, self-conscious, witness, active, different from matter and 
many- in number. The material (prakriti) is the inactive principle, which is 
itself unconscious, but moving by the proximity of the soul. The soul is 
liberated when this relationship with the material principle is recognised by him. 
Such recognition leads the soul to dissociate himself from prakriti. This is 
the summum bonum and is called mukti or liberation. 

Yoga. —This system was propounded by Patanjala Muni. It is also called theistic 
Sankhya. It recognizes in addition to the twenty-five entities of 
Sankhya mentioned above a twenty-sixth entity, viz. , god. The summum bonum 
is called the non-alternative state (kaivalya) which is reached by the eight 
processes of yoga by which the activities of the mind are controlled and 
subdued. The worship of god helps the purification and tranquilization of the 
mind. The system is very similar to Sankhya, the chief differences being that it 
recognizes the attainment of emancipation as dependent on the grace of god and 
also lays stress on the eightfold yoga practices. On attainment of the state of 
freedom from any form of activity (asamprajnata samadhi or mukti) misery 
finally disappears. This is the goal. It will be noticed that although the existence 
of God is admitted in the pre-non-alternative stages, He is only a secondary 
entity, the primary- object being the attainment of a desirable state for oneself 
which does not appear to be in any way related to God after it is realised. 



The system of Sankara .—Sankara has tried to deduce the doctrine of pure 
monism from the Brahma sutra of Maharshi Veda-Vyasa. According to 
this system the Brahman alone is true, all else is untrue. The world 
perceived through the senses is an illusion like the mistaking of the rope for the 
snake. There is no difference between the individual soul and the highest Soul 
Who is the Brahman. It is similar to the Nihilistic school of Buddhism and has 
been considered to be a form of Buddhism under the garb of lip-loyalty to 
the Scriptures. Its Brahman is only a negation of the material world and has 
no definable nature of its own. The assertion that the nature of the Brahman 
is spiritual (chit) as distinct from unconscious matter (achit), differentiates 
it theoretically but not practically from the doctrine of ‘Void’ of the Buddhists. 

It commits material suicide in order to establish a spiritual void. It is an 
unnatural and forced interpretation of the philosophy of the Brahma sutra and 
has obtained wide currency in this country, being recognized by many 
foreign scholars as the representative philosophy of Hindu orthodoxy. It is 
less prevalent in the south than in the north of India. Pure monism which in 
its present form owes its origin to Sankara, has branched out into many 
slightly differing forms. It has already been referred to in another place and will 
be considered in its relation to the teaching of Sree Chaitanyadeva in its 
proper place. 

The system of Baiakaranas. —The Grammarian Panini is the propounder of the 
view that by the study of sound in the form of the letters of the alphabet 
and words formed of them the knowledge of the object to which they point 
is spontaneously realized as the result of such practice. Sound is of two 
kinds, eternal and transitory. The eternal sound is directly expressive of its 
object. The Grammarians recognize this directly expressive sound as the 
Brahman. They hold that by the study of the science of sound by the gradual 
subsidence of ignorance the state of emancipation is attained. It is considered as 
the easy, royal road among the ways that lead to emancipation (moksha). 

The system of the Mimamsakas .—This was made by Maharshi Jaimini. The 
Word of the Scripture made by God out of pity for the attainment of a desirable 
state for oneself which does not appear to be in any way related to God after it 
is realized the suffering of the jiva, is the only authority by following which 
the fruit in the form of happiness promised by it is attainable. This 
school undertakes to supply the true interpretation and to reconcile 
apparently conflicting statements of the Scriptures. 



The system of the Naiyayikas. —The view of Gautama, the promulgator of this 
system, may be thus put: there are sixteen categories consisting of processes 
by which the knowledge of the twelve entities can be obtained. By 
constant hearing, contemplation and revision of the knowledge thus gained 
the individual soul and the Over-soul become known. This leads to 
the disappearance of misery and with it of false knowledge and their 
resultant preferences, repugnances and stupefaction, etc. There is then left no 
inclination for virtuous or vicious acts. After this, on the termination of the 
sufferings by the system of bodies produced by the previously accumulated 
activities leading to rebirth, there is final cessation of the twenty-one kinds of 
misery due to the six sense organs the six objects of the senses, the six 
intellectual faculties and pleasure and pain. This is the attainment of happiness 
or mukti. . 

The system of the Vaisheshikas. —This system owes its origin to Maharshi Kanad 
or Uluka. The summum bonum according to this system is the final cessation 
of misery (mukti). This is the result of true knowledge which is obtained by 
a critical and careful study of the Scriptures and their constant consideration 
and meditation. It is necessary, first of all, to differentiate the soul from the 
nonsoul or matter. This school holds that there is definite and eternal 
difference between the several permanent entities and also between the objects 
and their qualities, although the last two are eternally associated with each other. 
It is this peculiarity which gives its name to the system. The atom is the final 
limit of matter. The world, etc., made of material atoms, are eternal and any 
other worlds not so made are impermanent but eternal. The system closely 
resembles that of the Naiyayikas. 

Saivas.—According to this, Siva who is ever affectionate to His devotees is held 
to be god and the jivas are designated as animals (pashu). God awards the 
fruit of actions in accordance with the nature of such acts. All action is followed 
by its appropriate effect and is therefore, the cause of such effect. This does 
not affect the not affect the freedom of action of god as the supreme lord 
and master. God is formless. There are three entities, viz., the lord, the animal 
and the bond. Siva is the lord and those who have attained the state of Siva and 
the methods whereby this state is attained, e.g., initiation, etc., form the 
lordly category. The jiva-soul is the animal. This jiva-soul is different from the 
body, is eternal and is capable of taking the initiative. The jiva-soul freed by Siva 
from sin is elevated to his proper lordly position and merges with the divinity. 



The Pratyabhijnas. —According to this school the jiva-soul is the over-soul. This 
is established by the inference that a being who has knowledge and power 
of independent action is god; that which has not those powers is non-god, 
e.g., house, etc. The soul of jiva possesses the above powers and therefore it is 
god. This recognition of the identity of the jiva-soul with god is called 
Pratyabhijnas. The acquisition of this knowledge is alone necessary for the 
highest realization, viz., that Siva is the divinity. 

Nakulish Pashupat Saivas. —Siva is god. Being the ruler of jivas, Siva is also 
called Pashupati, jiva being named pashu (animal). God's will is the only 
cause of the world. The summum bonum (mukti) according to this view consists 
in the absolute cessation of all misery and the attaimment of the state of the 
divinity. Specific acts are prescribed as the method to be followed for 
obtaining emancipation. It considers service of god as tantamount to bondage. 

Saivas (Rasesvara or Mercurial school). —The summum bonum is the attainment 
of the state of the divinity. This is possible only through knowledge of god. 

But this knowledge is naturally and easily attainable in this material body if it 
is tranquilized by mercury. Siva is god. Mercury is Siva’s own self. The body is 
the friend of the soul and can be rendered spiritual and eternal in the above 
way. Mercury is called “parada” and “rasesvara” due to its qualities of enabling 
the jiva to get across the ocean of this world and being accordingly the 
supreme liquid. 

All these and many other atheistical views have been prevalent in this country 
from most remote times. All these are empirical and try to work up to God, Who 
is necessarily conceived as some form of sublimated or discarded matter, by the 
powers of the human mind working on the data supplied by the senses. Even in 
those cases where there is profession of obedience to the authority of the 
revealed Scriptures such admission is merely verbal and the method adopted is 
in every instance purely empirical, although help of the Scriptures is frequently 
sought in support of special views reached by the empiric process. In spite of the 
lip-profession of theism such method has consciously or unconsciously led in 
every case to the formulation of materialistic, unspiritual and godless systems. 
This, however, did not pass unchallenged. Or, it would be truer to say, that these 
views were really propounded in opposition to the theistic school which 
embodies the natural religion of the jiva and which has existed both potentially 
and in an explicit form from eternity. 



It is in fact futile to seek for the origin of the eternal religion in history limited 
by space and time. It has always existed. Its continued existence can also 
no doubt be established as far back as our limited vision extends. All the 
other systems have a historical origin. The theistic (Vaishnava) religion has 
no historical origin and no beginning. The other systems have attained 
temporary prominence on account of the vigour of their attack on theism 
(Vaishnavism). We shall return to this subject again. For the present it would be 
sufficient to point out that theism in its true sense, which is identical with 
Vaishnavism, possesses the most numerous body of expounders and they have 
always been engaged in refuting the fallacies of the empiric schools. In the Iron 
Age (Kali Yuga) the Vaishnava religion has had four principal teachers after 
whom the four divisions (sampradayas) of the community are named. Those 
four founder-Acharyas of the respective sampradayas in the chronological order 
of their appearance are,—Sreemad Adi Vishnuswami, Sreemad Nimbarka, 
Sreemad Ramanuja and Sreemad Madhva. The Vaishnava Founder Acharyas are 
pure revelationists (srauta panthis) as opposed to the schools mentioned above 
who are empiricists. They hold devotion to Godhead Whose Nature is 
purely spiritual to be the summum bonum. This goal is reached by obeying 
the Scriptures by submitting to receive the Word of Godhead from sadhus 
who alone understand their true import. This submission must also be complete. 

But although the four Vaishnava Founder-Acharyas, who preceded Sree 
Chaitanyadeva, and their followers certainly prepared the ground for the general 
re-establishment of pure theism their efforts only led their opponents to endless 
shifting of position and restatement of their views and this was done with so 
much vigour and success that at the time of the advent of Sree Chaitanyadeva the 
country had passed almost completely into the hands of the atheists as will 
appear from the incomplete list of the principal atheistic schools that were 
flourishing in His time which has been put before the reader in the above brief 
account. Sree Chaitanyadeva was opposed by all of these and He had to meet 
their leaders in learned disputations. The school which was most hostile to Him 
was that of the .smartas who do not admit the transcendence of Vishnu and His 
devotees but hold Vishnu to be a god of equal status with the other gods and 
endowed with specific powers. The smartas are frankly polytheistic and follow 
fruitive activities for the reward of material happiness promised by the 
Scriptures for their performance. The purely spiritual religion preached by Sree 
Chaitanyadeva was, therefore, utterly incomprehensible and repugnant to the 
doctrines and practices of the smartas. 



Sree Chaitanyadeva also had occasion to engage in controversy with Chand Kazi 
who believed in the doctrine of impersonal Godhead, and so 
thoroughly convinced him that it is not the teaching of the Koran that he turned 
out to be one of His staunchest supporters. 

The followers of the Vaishnava Founder-Acharyas had also succumbed to the 
seduction of the other schools and Sree Chaitanyadeva had to meet 
in controversy the leaders of pseudo-Vaishnava f actions who were in 
revolt against the authority of their own Acharyas. He opposed the Ramananda 
sect who called themselves the followers of Ramanuja but favoured 
salvationism, and the tattvavadins, professing to belong to the Madhva school, 
for a similar reason. He did not esteem the views of Ballava Acharya who, 
professing to follow Vishnuswami, differed from Sridhar, the commentator of 
the Sreemad Bhagavatam, also belonging to the same sampradaya. The 
sampradaya founded by Nimbarkacharya has so utterly neglected its original 
Acharya that his works and those of his proximate successors appear to be lost. 
Sree Chaitanyadeva rescued the teachings of the great Acharyas in the process of 
perfecting them and demonstrated the relation of harmony in which their 
systems stand to the full Truth. But before we finally plunge into the 
consideration of the religion taught and practiced by Sree Chaitanyadeva the 
issue will be simplified if we stop for a short time to take a passing glance at the 
views of the four great Vaishnava Founder-Acharyas who preceded Sree 
Chaitanya and kept the dim lamp of theistic scholarship burning which was to be 
merged in the Sunrise of Advent of the Supreme Lord Himself as Teacher of His 
Word. 



6 History Of Theism 


There is a certain class of people who have the temerity to regard the religion 
preached by Sree Chaitanyadeva as of recent origin and an original and 
new conception. The fact, however, is quite otherwise. It is no other than 
Sree Chaitanya Whom all the Scriptures of every Age and country have been 
eager to proclaim but have failed to adequately express. The Truth Who is no 
other than Sree Chaitanyadeva Himself, is the Same Who manifested Himself in 
the heart of Brahma at the beginning of material creation. The Word, Who, 
beginning with Brahma, made Himself manifest to a succession of persons, was 
gradually confused in many ways by the influence of time. The absolute Truth 
made available by Brahma in the form of the Word although He appeared 
in subsequent times in the community of the Rishis being handed down by 
the process of verbal transmission to the ear from preceptor to disciple has 
been variously transformed due to the intrusion, into the process, of the 
triple qualities of this material world. At those periods when the perverted 
version of the communication manifested to the ear threatens to completely 
mask and distort the real Truth that Lord Vishnu the Divine Personality Himself 
Who is both Source and the first Link in the chain of the line of preceptorial 
succession through whom the Divine Logos manifests Himself as articulated 
Sound to the ear, causes the Appearance of Himself in this world in different 
Forms in conformity with particular lines of activities appropriate for the 
particular requirements of the times. These Plenary Divine Manifestations 
constitute the series of the Leela-Avataras of Vishnu. 

In this manner Truth manifested Himself successively in different forms in the 
seven different lives of Brahma. The first four births of Brahma took 
place during the Age of Truth (Satya Yuga), the first of the four Yugas that form 
a complete cycle of the Ages. In the first birth of Brahma, which was mental, 
the Fenapas learnt the Absolute Truth from Sree Narayana. From Fenapas He 
was heard by the Baikhanasas and from them by Chandra. In Brahma’s second 
birth, which was ocular, by the grace of Narayana, Brahma and Rudra and, 
from Rudra, the Bala-khilyas attained to the Truth. In the third birth of 
Brahma, which was oral, from Narayana, Suparna received the super-mental 
root-formula (mantram) of the Rig Veda. At the same time the 
Bighashasi sampradaya obtained the same from Vayu and from the Bighashasis, 
Mahodadhi received the experience of the exclusive spiritual function. In the 
fourth auricular birth of Brahma the eternal function (satvata dharma) 



was promulgated in the Vedas along with the Aranyakas. At this time from 
Brahma, Svarochisha Manu, from him, his son Samkhapada and, from 
Samkhapada, Subarnabha Manu, the son of Samkhapada, learnt the eternal 
function (satvata dharma). In the Age of Truth the religion was thus spread by 
the fourfold manifestation in the form of the mental, ocular, oral and auricular 
births of Brahma. 

At this time there had not yet begun the promulgation of the varnashrama 
dharma of the Vedic Karmakanda which was instituted in the next Age, viz., 
the Treta Yuga. Fenapa; Baikhanasa, Soma, Rudra, Balakhilya, Suparna, 

Vayu, Mahodadhi, Svarochisha Manu, Samkhapada, Subarnabha and other 
devotees of Hari of this pre-historic age, all belonged to the ‘one-path’ branch 
(the Ekayana Sakha) of the Vedic Tree. At that time there being yet no divisions 
of the Vedic School the Vedic Rishis are designated as having belonged to the 
one-path branch. Fenapa, Baikhanasa, Balakhilya and later the Audumbaras, 
in accordance with the four pre-historic divisions, formed a separate branch 
of those belonging to the vanaprastha stage even as early as the time when 
the varnashrama dharma was established. The varnashrama dharma , a 
classification of society into a fourfold division according to the twofold 
principle of quality and work, was introduced at the beginning of the Second 
Age (Treta) to which also belong three additional births of Brahma. At the 
beginning of the Treta Age in the fifth nasatya birth of Brahma from Narayana, 
Sanat Kumara received admission into the one-path religion. By Sanat Kumara, 
Birona, by Birona, Raibhya, by Raibhya, Kukshi were successively admitted into 
the same one-path religion (aikantika dharma). While in the sixth birth of 
Brahma from the egg, from Brahma, Barhisat and his elder brother Abikampana, 
etc., obtained entry into the one path eternal religion. The chant of the Sama 
Veda first appeared in this sixth birth of Brahma. It is in the seventh birth of 
Brahma from the lotus that, from Narayana, Brahma, from Brahma, Dakshya, 
Aditya, Bibasvan, Manu and Ikshvaku, etc., being established in the Bhagavata 
religion, attained to great fame. 

The Sree community (sampradaya) sprang from Ratnakara. Ratnakara obtained 
the religion from the ancient Bighashasi comnunity and this last again 
from Vayu who belonged to the time of the third oral birth of Brahma. The 
Brahma and Rudra communities received the mercy of Sree Narayana in the 
fourth ocular birth of Brahma. Their successors, the Balakhilyas, maintained the 
lines of Brahma and Rudra. Sanat Kumara received the one-path religion from 
Sree Narayana in the fifth nasatya (nasal) birth of Brahma. 



The activities of the series of the Plenary Divine Manifestations of this world 
(Avataras) of the lotus period, are narrated in the Scriptures. The practices of the 
different communities of the eternal religion who accepted the ten Appearances 
in this world of Vishnu in the Forms of Fish, Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion, Dwarf, 
Rama son of Bhrigu, Rama son of Dasaratha, Baladeva, Buddha and Kalki as 
their Objects of worship, are recorded in such works as the Pur anas, the 
Mahabharata, etc. Although these books happen to be written in Sanskrit we 
notice in them mention of the eternal (satvata) religion of the prehistoric Age in 
the form of hints and also in the shape of a certain amount of descriptive matter. 
The worshippers of the Divinity in the Forms of His ten Avataras have acquired 
the designations of bhakta, (devotee), ‘bhagavata’ (godly) or ‘satvata’ ( eternal). 

Wherever there arises the consciousness of transitory, changeable, finite time 
and of mundane personality conformably to our worldly judgment there 
appear two qualitative manifestations of the Godhead, Who are also classed in 
the category of Divinity. Although the transcendental knowledge is always 
manifest in the heart of Brahma, among his successors, due to their 
sensuous predilections, various temporary experiences have been wrongly 
assigned to the category of the eternal Truth. Whence there are to be found in 
this world in regard to Godhead a great variety of mutually conflicting views. 
We find accordingly at different places the cults of the village-god, of 
ghosts, mesmerism, the process of pancha-pakshi, the cult of the followers of 
energy, immersed in the enjoyment of the five pleasures making for a 
material objective, the creed of the worshippers of the Sun imbued with a 
mixture of cognitive and active qualities and the system of the worshippers of 
Ganapati, a product of the cognitive in association with benumbing qualities. 
These cults setting themselves up as its rivals have been trying by their loud 
clamours to disturb the eternal religion. The desire of his successors for other 
things than the spiritual service of Godhead by disregarding the method of 
service of the Transcendental that had appeared in the mind of Brahma, drove 
them into the paths of fmitive work and empiricism of the elevationists and the 
liberationists respectively. These temporarily excited mental tendencies are 
checked by the power of Rudra who is adored by the (material) negative or 
nihilistic quality. The various faces of Brahma, the Avatara in active quality of 
the Transcendental Vishnu in this material world, have been imagined, 
synthesized and made manifest by persons possessed of corresponding natures 
and, up to the time when those active tendencies are not absorbed in the 
negative, the worship of qualified Vishnu manifests its potency in this 
phenomenal world. As a matter of fact the conceptions of qualified and non- 



qualified worship are correlatives in the mundane apprehension. 


Sree Chaitanyadeva occupying the seat of the world-Teacher, has uprooted many 
kinds of perverse and abstruse speculations of the stubborn race of sophists. The 
contemplation of Vishnu in the Age of Truth, the sacrifice for Vishnu in the 
following Age (Treta), the ritualistic worship of Vishnu in the third (Dvapara) 
Age, and the chanting (kirtana) of the Name of Godhead in the fourth (Kali) 

Age, are specially suitable for the bound jiva for the attainment of the Sight of 
Godhead and His service. But the eternal Scriptures (satvata shastra) declare 
that in the seventh regime of the lotus-born Brahma the desire to establish the 
equality of the gods exercising delegated power, with Vishnu will continue to 
produce the delusion of the sojourners in the domain of fruitive works for the 
space of twenty five hundred years. The belief that the Feet-wash of Vishnu is 
only ordinary water will continue up to the five-thousandth year, the belief that 
Vishnu is the equal of the other gods of the hierarchy of gods will be accepted as 
certain truth by those journeying on the path of misfortune. The spiritual 
Scriptures (satvata shastra) say that despite hundreds of defects of Kali,—the 
fourth Age, it possesses one supremely redeeming feature, viz., that in this Age 
the bound soul (jiva) obtains deliverance from the clutches of worldly judgment 
by listening to the chant (kirtana) instituted by Sree Gaursundar. The individual 
soul in the Kali Age is freed from the vagaries of conflicting views by the power 
of the chant (kirtana) of Krishna to the exclusion of the narrow consideration of 
the controversialists of the schools of empiric knowledge and fruitive works. It is 
for this reason that the writer of Sree Chaitanya Charitamrita in the very 
beginning of that work, in the second chapter, has declared in the form of an 
emphatic glorification of the chant, the message of the super-mundane and all- 
pervasive mercy of Sree Chaitanyadeva. Those who follow Sree Chaitanyadeva 
are alone freed from the clutches of error by the abandonment of all evil 
association. Those who are so deluded as not to avail the mercy of Sree 
Chaitanya will remain confined to the worldly point of view within the narrow 
hole of error by the logic of the frog in the well. They will never obtain the 
privilege of being employed in the service of the Super-sensuous. 

The following brief review of the historical development of the theistic thought 
will further elucidate the Scriptural position outlined above. 

The pursuit of the summum bonum is the proper and natural function of the 
individual soul (jiva). The co-eternal associated existence of this eternal function 
with the soul since his appearance needs must be admitted. This natural function 



was at first latent and had the form of the conception of his own identity, with 
the Brahman as the manifestation of himself. There was not ,yet any discussion 
of the bond of the highest love that united the two by the establishment of 
definite difference between the individual soul (jiva) and the Brahman. This 
religious doctrine of the intellectual realization of the identity of the individual 
soul with the Brahman, continued to prevail for a long time. The Rishis tried to 
find out the proper occupation of the soul by formulating from time to time 
various methods such as sacrifice (yajna), asceticism (tapasya), ijya, sama, 
dama, patience (titiksha), dana, etc. A long period passed in this quest of a 
vocation in the domain of works essentially materialistic on abandonment of the 
thought, ‘I am the Brahman’ When subsequently the reward attainable in the 
domain of fruitive works was judged to be trivial and harmful, the mind of the 
Aryas applied itself to the question of liberation (moksha). Sanaka, Sanatana and 
several others had altogether ignored the path pointed by desire for sensuous 
enjoyment. But Prajapati, Manu and Indra and other devas hoped to please 
Godhead by sacrifices (yajna) leading to worldly improvement. In regard to the 
fruit of such activities the ideas of heaven and hell were conceived to be final. 
The pure essence of the soul and the quest for emancipation and final attainment 
of the highest satisfaction, none of these were at all realized. In the Sreemad 
Bhagavatam is found an exhaustive discussion of these three subjects and the 
conclusions are clearly stated. 

The most merciful Sree Ramanujacharya, the disciple of the illustrious 
Sathakopa, was the first to bring together the fundamentals of the 
Vaishnava thought. Some time before him Sankaracharya by his commentary of 
the Vedanta sutra gave such a strong impetus to the pursuit of the 
empiric knowledge that the goddess of devotion was taken by surprise and was 
checked and remained for a long time hid inside the hearts of her 
devotees. Sankaracharya cannot be held to be responsible for this untoward 
result. Far from blaming him we should rather regard him as the ideal of a patriot 
because there was in that Age a special reason for undertaking such a task for 
the indirect service of the Truth. It is well known that a great person bearing 
the name of Gautama who was sprung from the Sakva clan of Kapilavastu 
five hundred years before Christ instituted such a vigorous movement of 
empiric knowledge that in consequence of it the previously established system 
of varnashrama dharma was in imminent danger of being wholly obliterated. 

The Buddhist religion preached by Gautama became a thorn in the side of the 
whole ancient inheritance of the Aryas. Buddhism soon spread beyond the 
Punjab, under the patronage of kings such as Kanishka, Huvishka, Vasudeva, 



etc., of the Scythian dynasty, into the trans-Himalayan regions of Tibet, Tartary, 
China and other countries In another direction the Buddhist religion was 
firmly implanted in Burma, Ceylon and many other places by the efforts of 
Emperors like Asokavardhana, etc. The ancient holy places (tirthas) of the Aryas 
were changed into centres of Buddhism and became almost wholly Buddhistic 
in outward appearance. It even appeared possible that all traces of the religion 
of the Brahmanas might be destroyed. When this undesirable disturbance 
assumed the most dangerous proportions, in the seventh century of the Christian 
era, the Brahmanas becoming furiously indignant began a steady and 
organized attempt for the destruction of Buddhism. In this crisis Sreemad 
Sankaracharya eventually became the leader of the Brahmanas with their 
headquarters at Benares. 

From the early Christian epoch onwards the vigour and keenness of intellect that 
is found in the south of India, is not so much in evidence in other parts of the 
country From this time there arose in the southern firmament, like stars of the 
first magnitude, such extraordinary personalities as those of Sankara, Sathakopa, 
Yamunacharya, Ramanuja, Vishnuswami and Madhvacharya and a host of 
eminent scholars. Sankaracharya failing to achieve much success with the help 
of his Brahmanized following, having adopted the ten orders of sannyasins 
bearing the designations of Giri, Puri, Bharati, etc., winning over the Brahmanas 
fond of materialistic activities, by the physical and controversial prowess of 
those sannyasins, set about to effect the destruction of the Buddhists. In those 
places where he failed to bring over the Buddhists to his side Sankara did not 
scruple to obtain even the assistance of the Naga sannyasins for his purpose. 
And, finally, by the compilation of the commentary of the Vedanta sutra, by 
mixing up therein the doctrine of fruitive works of the Brahmanas with the 
principle of empiric knowledge of the Buddhists, he effected the unification of 
the views of Brahmanas and Buddhists. After this he changed the names of the 
Buddhist shrines and idols and made them conform to the religion of the Vedas. 
The Buddhists, partly through fear of violence and partly in view of the partial 
retention of their own creed, submitted to the Brahmanas from necessity. Those 
Buddhists to whom such a procedure appeared to be hateful fled either to Burma 
or Ceylon, carrying with them the relics of Buddha. It was at this time that the 
Buddhist pandits made their way to Ceylon from Puri with the tooth-relic of the 
Buddha Avatara. In the fifth century A D the Chinese savant Fa Hian visiting 
Puri wrote with great joy that in that place Buddhism existed in an unalloyed 
form and there was no oppression by the Brahmanas. Subsequently, after the 
change noticed above in the seventh century A.D., the next Chinese scholar 



Hiuen Tsang wrote from Puri that the tooth of Buddha had been carried to 
Ceylon and the holy place had been utterly desecrated by the Brahmanas. 


On a consideration of these events the activities of Sankara would appear to be 
really wonderful By divesting the country of the nomenclature of Buddhism, 
he effected to a certain extent the welfare of India in the national sense in as 
much as it prevented the further attenuation of the old society of the Arayas, a 
process which had been in progress Especially did he change the mentality of the 
Aryas by introducing into Arayan books the controversial method. The 
impetus which was thus imported by him enabled the Arvan intellect to 
investigate even subjects the consideration of which had been hitherto 
unattempted by them. By the force of the controversial current of Sankara, the 
flower of devotion, afloat on the stream of the mind of the devotee, was in a state 
of flutter. But Ramanujacharya, by the vigour of argumentation imparted by 
Sankara and by the grace of God, by composition of a fresh commentary of the 
Vedanta sutra, resuscitated the vigour of the Vaishnava thought. Within a short 
time Vishnuswami III, Nimbaditya and Madhvaswami, establishing the 
Vaishnava view in slightly different forms, also wrote commentaries of the 
Brahma sutra in accordance with their respective opinions. All of them after the 
manner of Sankaracharya, wrote a commentary on the Geeta, a bhashya of the 
thousand Names and a commentary on the Upanishads. From this time the 
opinion, viz., that for the recognition of a school it was necessary for it to possess 
its own commentaries on the four aforesaid books, established its hold on the 
minds of the people. From the above four Vaishnava Acharyas the four current 
schools of Vaishnavism, viz.those of Sree, Brahma, Rudra and Sanaka, have had 
their historical origin. 

Sree Chaitanya appeared at Nabadwip in the fifteenth century of the Christian 
era. At first as house-holder and subsequently as sannyasin Sree 
Chaitanya elaborated the full knowledge of the two ultimate principles of the 
Vaishnava religion. That the real significance of the land of Gauda (Bengal) is 
attainable with difficulty even y the devas, admits of no doubt by the testimony 
of the Scriptures. Appearing in this chosen land, the Darling of Sachi Devi, the 
Most Highly Revered of the Vaishnavas, has given away freely to all the people 
the boundless wealth of spiritual Truth, that can be compared with nothing 
else. This is well known to all persons. By rare good fortune it has chanced that 
we have been born in this unique land. For a long time to come those 
Vaishnavas who will appear in this land, will also regard themselves glorified by 
such birth as we have obtained. 



Sree Chaitanya, with the help of Nityananda and Advaita, encompassed by 
Rupa, Sanatana, Jiva, Gopala Bhatta, the two Raghunathas, 

Ramananda, Svarupa, Sarbabhauma, etc., has expounded clearly the true 
relationship of the individual soul (jiva) with Godhead, has shortened our work 
in regard to spiritual method demonstrating the superiority of chanting the name 
(Kirtana), and, in regard to the goal of spiritual endeavour, has laid down the 
extremely simple end of lasting mellowing quality (rasa) to be met with on the 
Path of complete spiritual endeavour (Braja). 

The reader will find, if he considers the subject with special care, that the 
principle of the summum bonum has been steadily gaining in 
clearness, simplicity and consciousness from primitive times on to the present 
day in proportion as all impurities, deposited by Age and clime, are being 
expelled, and its beauty, waxing in brilliancy, is appearing within the ken of our 
direct view. The Highest Object of spiritual endeavour first appeared on the 
soil, overgrown with the kusa grass, on the bank of the Sarasvati. Slowly 
gathering strength it played out its childish pastimes on the ice-bound settlement 
of Badarikasrama. Its adolescence was nursed in the forest land of Nimisha on 
the bank of the Gomati. Its youthful activities are observed in the Dravida 
country on the beautiful bank of the Kaveri. The maturity is manifested to our 
view on the bank of the stream of the Jahnabi, that sanctifies the world, in the 
town of Nabadwip. 

If we consider the history of the whole world we are confirmed in our view that 
the acme in the progressive quest of the summum bonum, has been reached 
at Nabadwip. The Supreme Soul is the only Object of the love of the plurality 
of separate individual souls (jivas). If the Supreme Soul, Who is the Integer, is 
not served with love, He Call never be easy of access to the separate 
fractional souls. He is not easy of attainment even if He is constantly meditated 
upon by abandonment of all other attachments that bind individual souls to this 
world. He is captivated by a mellow quality (rasa) of the appropriate kind, and 
by leaving this out He cannot be obtained. This mellow quality (rasa) is of 
five specifications, viz., (1) tranquil (santa), (2) as of the servant (dasya),(3) as 
of the friend (sakhya), (4) as of parents (batsalya), and (5) as of the wife 
or mistress (madhura) . The mellow quality whose specific characteristic 
is tranquillity is the one to appear initially by reference to the Brahman, or, 
in other words, it is equivalent to the merely continued existence of the 
fractional individual soul in the Greater Principle, on the cessation of the 
miseries due to the worldly connection. In this state, with the exception of a 



slight measure of negative bliss, there is no other freedom. At this stage there has 
not yet been established any reciprocal relationship of the spiritual novice with 
the Supersoul. The mellow quality characterized by servitude (dasya rasa) is the 
next in order of manifestation. It possesses ah the treasures of tranquil 
mellowness (santa rasa) and something more. This new factor is affection, i e , a 
sense that an object belongs to me (mamata). In this specific quality (rasa) there 
is found relationship with Godhead which may be expressed thus, ‘Godhead is 
my Master and I am His eternal servant 5 . However excellent a person may be 
in himself one does not feel any particular concern for him unless there exists 
also a definite personal relationship between him and oneself. Therefore 
the mellowness of personal servitude (dasya rasa ) is very much superior to that 
of impersonal tranquillity (santa rasa). As servitude (dasya) is superior to the 
state of perfect unconcern (santa), so also is friendship (sakhya) very much 
superior to servitude (dasya). Because in servitude (dasya) there is a thorn in the 
shape of distant reverence. But in friendship (sakhya) there is present a great 
jewel in the form of confidential relationship. Can there be any doubt that he is 
the greatest among servants who possesses the confidence and is, therefore, as 
it were, a friend, of his Master? In the mellowness of friendship (sakhya 
rasa) there are present all the values of the mellowness of unconcern and 
servitude (santa and dasya rasas). Just as friendship (sakhya) is higher than 
servitude (dasya), in like manner parental affection (batsalya) is superior to 
friendship (sakhya). This is self-evident. Of ah friends the son is the most liked 
and is a source of far greater happiness In the mellowness of parental affection 
(batsalya rasa) the constituent values of ah the four mellownesses (rasas) are 
combined. Although the mellowness of parental affection (batsalya rasa) 
appears to be so superior to all the other mellow qualities (rasas), it appears very 
insignificant by the side of the mellowness of the sweetness of amorous love 
(madhura rasa) There are many things that have to be kept outside the 
relationship of parent and child, but not between husband and wife Therefore, if 
the subject is very closely considered, ah the preceding mellownesses (rasas) 
will be found to have attained their perfection in that of amorous love, as 
between husband and wife (madhura rasa). 

If we consider the history of these five distinctive mellow qualities (rasas), it is 
clearly perceived that the mellowness of the tranquil state (santa rasa), 
first appeared in this world in India. When the soul was not satisfied by 
sacrificial rites by means of material objects those who professed the doctrine of 
the highest spiritual good, such as Sanaka, Sanatana, Sananda, 

Sanatkumara, Narada, Mahadeva, etc., renouncing all attachment for the material 



world, experienced the mellowness of tranquillity ( santa rasa ) by being 
thereby established in the Super-soul. Long after this the mellowness of 
servitorship (dasya rasa) appeared as in Hanuman, the ruler of the Kapis. The 
mellow quality of tranquil spiritual servitude (dasya rasa) spreading gradually, 
was most beautifully manifested in the south-western part of the continent of 
Asia in a great personage, viz., Moses. Uddhaba and Arjuna, who followed the 
king of the Kapis by a long interval, attained to the privilege of the mellowness 
of tranquil serving spiritual friendship with Godhead (sakhya rasa) and 
preached it to the world. By slowly spreading to other countries this mellow 
quality of the love of a friend for Godhead touched the heart of a religious 
preacher of Arabia, Muhammad The mellowness of parental affection (batsalya 
rasa) appeared in India at intervals in different forms. Of this the variety of love 
for Godhead, as of a son for his father, but regarded as the most High and 
Mighty Ruler of the world (aisvaryagata), spreading beyond India, fully 
manifested itself in Jesus, the saviour of the Jews. The mellowness of amorous 
love (madhura rasa), on its first appearance, irradiated the region of Braja. 

The permeation of the heart of the individual soul under the thraldom 
of worldliness, by the mellowness of tranquil, serving, friendly, 
affectionate, amorous spiritual devotion to Godhead, is supremely difficult to 
attain, because it is confined only to specially elected and perfectly pure souls 
(jivas). The Moon of Nabadwip, Darling of Sachi, with His own associates, 
promulgated this most subtle of all mellownesses (rasas). The exquisite 
sweetness of this relationship with Godhead has not yet spread beyond India. 

Not long ago a Western scholar, Newman, realizing this mellowness (rasa) to a 
slight extent, gave publicity to it in England by writing a book on the 
subject. The nations of Europe and America have not up till now been satiated 
with the sweetness of their filial love for Godhead characterized by 
reverence, promulgated by Jesus. It is hoped that by the grace of Godhead, and 
at no very distant date, they will begin to taste of the wine of the mellowness of 
spiritual amour (madhura rasa), with even greater ardour. It will have appeared 
that a particular state of the mellow quality (rasa) first of all makes its 
appearance in India and spreads from here to the Western countries, generally 
after the lapse of a long period. There is, therefore, according to precedent, still a 
short period to run before the mellowness of amorous devotion (madhura rasa) 
is fully preached to all parts of the world. Just as the Sun rising first of all in 
India gradually illuminates all the countries of the West, in like manner 
the incomparable rays of the highest good, at intervals making their 
first appearance in India, suffuse the West before many days have passed. 



7 The Founder-Acharyas 


The contributions of Vishnuswami, Nimbaditya, Ramanuja and Madhva, the 
Founder-Acharyas of the four Vaishnava communities (sampradayas) of 
the present day, to the cause of theism, are so valuable and so necessary to 
know for a proper understanding of the theological position of Sree Chaitanya 
that we shall close our brief survey of the historical trend of theistic thought with 
a short account of the systems of the four great Vaishnava Acharyas 
who preceded Sree Chaitanya. 

The necessity of sampradaya or organized community, in the domain of religion, 
has been explicitly recognized in the Shastras. The words of Sree Vyasadeva in 
the Padma Pur ana on this subject are to the effect that the verbal formulae that 
deliver from mental hallucinations (mantrams) are never effective except within 
the spiritual community; and the same authority goes on to observe that in the 
Fourth (Kali) Age there will be for this purpose four theistic (Vaishnava) 
communities (sampradayas) founded by their respective Acharyas, by the will of 
Godhead. This is not the advocacy of sectarianism. It upholds the principles of 
association and continuity in religious life as against anarchism. If rightly 
understood it is the procedure that is naturally followed by all persons who are 
sincerely minded, prefer the good law to anarchy and association with good 
people to egoistic isolation, and are truly catholic, not merely by profession, but 
also in their conduct. Those pseudo-liberals who pose as being above any class 
or community, are only anarchists in disguise. The truer instinct of mankind has 
always been alive to the fundamental necessity of belonging to a good, z'.e., well 
regulated, community. 

The four communities (sampradayas) of the Iron Age are connected with the 
ancient times by their recognition of the ulterior authority of the eternal ancient 
teachers, viz, Lakshmi, Brahma, Rudra and the four Sanas (chatuhsanah), 
respectively. The four Founder-Acharyas of the Iron Age professed to preach the 
views of those original teachers of the religion. Sree Rudra is the source of the 
teaching of Sree Vishnuswami; Sanaka, Sanatana, Sananda, Sanat Kumara, that 
of Sree Nimbarka Swami, Sree Lakshmidevi that of Sree Ramanuja Swami and 
the four-faced Brahma that of Madhva Swami, in the Iron Age. The original pre¬ 
historic teachers, who are the ultimate source of the four communities, in the 
chronological order of their appearance, are (1) Lakshmi, the eternal and 
inseparable Consort of Vishnu, (2 Brahma sprung from the navel-lotus of 



Garbhodasayi Vishnu, (3) Rudra sprung from the second Purusha, and (4) the 
four Sanas who are the sons of Brahma born from the mind. The chronological 
order of the Acharyas of the Iron Age is (1) Sree Vishnuswami, (2) Sree 
Nimbaditya, (3) Sree Ramanuja, and (4) Sree Madhva. 

Sree Vishnuswami 

There are three different Vishnuswamis belonging to the same line. The first of 
them in order of time is known as Adi Vishnuswami and also as Sarbajna 
Muni. He was born in the Pandya country, the southernmost part of ancient 
Dravida in the third century B.C. His name, before he accepted sannyasa, was 
Devatanu. He was a tridandi sanyasin and re-established the old institution of 
tridanda sannyasa in the Iron Age. We find among his immediate followers no 
less than seven hundred tridanda sannyasins who were availed by him for 
preaching Vaishnavism against Buddhism. Vishnuswami is sometimes 
confounded with Sarbjnatma Muni who was an exclusive monist 
(kevaladvaitavadin). The system propounded by Adi Vishnuswami or Sarbajna 
Muni is known by the name of .suddhadvaita siddhanta., the pure monistic 
doctrine, as distinct from exclusive or pseudomonism. 

According to Sree Vishnuswami the individual soul (jiva) is a constituent part of 
the Substantive Reality (vastu); the power of the vastu is may a; the activity 
of the vastu is the world; none of these being separate from the ‘Vast’. 

The first point to be noticed in this connection is that Vishnuswami does not 
identify the individual soul (jiva) with the Brahman; neither does he conceive 
of the individual soul (jiva) as independent of the Brahman. His metaphor to 
bring out the relationship between the two, is that of the sparks of a great fire 
and the fire from which the sparks issue. Therefore, in the Scriptures the 
individual soul (jiva) has been sometimes called the Brahman, being 
qualitatively the same; and in other passages the individual soul (jiva) has been 
differentiated from the Brahman. In the next place the world being the activity of 
the Brahman, is also real and eternal. The origin and dissolution of the world 
as found in the Scriptures, mean its temporary disappearance but not 
substantive loss. The world is the unchanged transformation of the Brahman, just 
as the different ornaments made of gold are unchanged gold. Godhead, 
according to Vishnuswami, is the Embodiment of existence, self-consciousness 
and bliss in the embrace of the twin powers of ‘ Hladini ’ (that which delights and 
is delighted) and ‘Samvit (that which knows and makes known), as distinct 



from the bound soul who is, on the other hand, the source of all misery 
and enveloped in nescience. In his state of pure monistic consciousness the 
soul (jiva) is established in the relationship of servant to Godhead, which is 
the natural condition for the soul (jiva) who in the pure state is a fractional part 
of the whole, viz., Godhead. Godhead is the Lord of ‘maya’ the soul (jiva) 
is subduable by the deluding or limiting energy (maya). Godhead is self¬ 
manifest and transcendental bliss. The soul (jiva), although also self-manifest by 
reason of his being an integral part of the Whole, is located in the plane of 
misery, due to his attachment for a second entity besides Godhead. Godhead is 
ever free and never submits to any adjunctive modifications. He is possessed 
of transcendental qualities, is all-knowing, all-powerful, the Lord of all, 
the Regulator of all, the Object of worship of all, the Awarder of the fruit of 
all actions, the Abode of all beneficent qualities and substantive 
existence, consciousness and bliss. 

Sree Vishnuswami following in the footsteps of Sree Rudra, was the worshipper 
of Sree Panchashya (Man-lion). He admits the Bodily Form of Godhead made 
of the principles of existence, consciousness and bliss, and the eternal 
coexistence of worship, worshipper and the worshipped. In his own words 
‘the emancipated also, playfully assuming bodily forms, serve the Lord’. The 
main authorities recognized by the Vishnuswami community (sampradaya) 
are ‘Nrisimha tapani‘Sreemad Bhagavatam’ and ‘Sree Vishnupuranam' Of the 
works of Vishnuswami himself the ‘sarbajna sukta alone is mentioned. 

The Vishnuswami school counts very few adherents at the present day. 

Sree Vallabhacharya, although he calls himself his follower, differs in 
certain respects from the views of Sree Vishnuswami. 

Sree Nimbaditya 

Sree Nimbaditya is the propounder of bifurcial monism (dvaitadvaitada ). Sree 
Nimbarkaditya appeared in the town of Baidurya-pattan (mod. ‘Munger-pattan’ 
or ‘Mungi-pattaiT) in the Telugu country. He is known variously 
as ‘Nimbaditya,’ ‘Nimbarka,’ or ‘Nimbabibhavasu’ and sometimes also as 
‘Aruneya,’ ‘Niyamanada,’ and ‘Haripriyacharya,’. His followers are known as 
Nimayets and are different from the ‘Nimanandis’ who profess to be followers of 
Sree Chaitanyadeva under His appellation of Nimananda,. Sree Nimbaditya was 
an ascetic of the triple staff (tridandi sannyasin ); the line of his 
preceptorial succession being (1) Sree Narayana, (2) Hamsa, (3) the 



Chatuhsanas, viz., Sanaka, etc. and (4) Nimbadityacharya. Sree Nimbaditya's 
commentary of the Bhasya known as the ‘Vedanta parijata-saurabha’ and there 
are also several other works written by him. 

The system of Nimbarka holds the ‘heard transcendental sound’ ( sruti ) as the 
highest natural evidence of the Truth, and also accepts the testimony of 
other Shastras when they follow heard sound (sruti). The source of 
Nimbaditya’s teaching is the instruction imparted by the four Sanas to Sree 
Narada Goswami in the seventh prapathaka of the Chandogyopanishad, which 
may be summed up as follows, viz., ‘that the Puranas are the fifth Veda; Vishnu 
is the Lord of all, devotion to Godhead in the forms of firm faith (sraddha) and 
close addiction ( nishtha ) is glorified; there is nothing equal or superior to the 
love for Godhead; the eternal Abode of Godhead is praised; Godhead is 
independent of any other thing; the perfectly emancipated are the eternal 
servitors of Godhead and are engaged in eternal pastimes in the region of self- 
conscious activities in the company of Godhead; Godhead has power of 
appearance to and disappearance from our view; the Vaishnavas are eternal and 
transcendental; the grace of Godhead is glorified, etc., etc.’ 

According to Sree Nimbaditya the individual (jiva) soul and the Supreme Soul 
are related to each other as integral part and Whole. The soul (jiva) is 
different from Godhead, but not separate. The soul (jiva) is both knowledge and 
knower, like the Sun which is self-luminous and also makes visible other objects. 
As an infinitesimal particle of consciousness the soul (jiva) is subordinate to 
Godhead Who is plenary consciousness. The souls (jivas) are infinite in number. 
By reason of his smallness he is liable to association with and dissociation 
from bodies made by the deluding energy of Godhead (maya). In the bound state 
the soul (jiva) is imprisoned in the gross and subtle physical bodies; in the 
free state he is dissociated from them. Souls (jivas) are of three distinct kinds, 
viz., those that are (1) free, (2) bound yet free, and (3) bound. There are 
various gradations of each one of these. The soul (jiva) is freed from the 
bondage of the deluding energy (maya) by the grace of Godhead, there being no 
other way. 

The inanimate objects are two, viz., (1) time, and (2) deluding energy (maya). 
Time is either transcendental or material. The former is self-conscious 
and eternal, i.e., undivided into past, present and future. The deluding 
energy (maya) is the perversion of the self-conscious (chit), or the shadow of the 
latter, and possesses the qualities of the shadow. Divinity is free from defect. The 



real nature of Godhead is full of infinite beneficience. Godhead as Krishna is 
the highest Brahman. Krishna is the source of all beauty and sweetness. 

Attended by His Own Power, the Daughter of Brishabhanu, constantly served 
by thousands of intimate female friends (sakhis) who are the extended self of the 

Daughter of Brishabhanu, Krishna is the Object of the eternal worship of the 
individual soul (jiva). He has an eternal and transcendental bodily Form. He 
is formless to the material vision but possessed of form to the spiritual eye. He 
is independent, all-powerful, Lord of all, possessed of inconceivable power 
and eternally worshipped by the gods such as Brahma, Siva, etc. Worship is of 
two kinds, viz., (1) tentative devotion during novitiate, and (2) the highest 
devotion characterized by love. The latter is aroused by the practice of nine 
kinds of devotion as means, consisting of hearing, chanting, etc. 

The Nimbarka community is not mentioned in his works by Sree Jiva Gowami. 
He is also unnoticed in the Sarbadarsanasamgraha of Sayana Madhava. 

From which it is supposed that the current views of the present 
Nimbarka community were not extensively known till after the time of the 
author of Sarbadarsansamgraha, or even of the six Goswamins. There is, 
however, no doubt whatever that Sree Nimbaditya is a very ancient Acharya and 
the founder of the satvata dvaitadvaita sampradaya. 

Sree Ramanuja 

Sree Ramanuja made his appearance in the year 938 of the Saka era in the 
village of Sriparambattur or Sree Mahabhutapuri about twenty-six miles to 
the west of Madras, in the family of a Dravida Brahmana. His name, before 
he became an ascetic of the triple staff (tridandi sannyasin), as 
Lakshmana. Lakshmana Desika accepted renunciation (sannyasa) on the bank of 
Anantasar at Conjeeveram invoking grace of Sree Yamunacharya. He soon 
became the head of the Sree community (sampradaya) , which had its 
headquarters at Sree Rangam. He travelled all over India visiting Kashmir, 
Benares, Puri, etc., and established the pancharatrika view (the system of 
fivefold knowledge) at all the important centers of religion. We do not intend to 
enter further into the details of his wonderful career at this place. 


Sree Ramanuja is the author of numerous works, the chief of which are Vedanta- 
sara, Vedanta-dipa, Vedartha -samgraha, Geeta Bhashya, Sree Bhashya, etc. 



In the Ramanuja community every one is required to undergo purification by the 
method of the fivefold purificatory process (pancha-samskara). Even a highborn 
Brahmana, according to the Ramanujis, who has not gone through the above 
purificatory process, is as much an untouchable as the lowest of the Chandalas, 
and a Chandala so purified is held to possess the highest sanctity. In the 
Ramanuja community Vishnu is exclusively worshipped and the worship of all 
other gods is absolutely forbidden. In this community there is also the institution 
of renunciation of the triple staff (tridanda sannyasa). 

Sree Ramanuja is the propounder of the view which is known as Distinctive 
Monotheism (Vishishtadvaitavada). This view is formally 
established scripturally in his commentary on the Brahma-sutra known as Sree 
Bhashya. 

The system of Sree Ramanuja may be set forth as follows: The Nature of the 
Supreme Brahman is unitary. Brahman who is without a second is, 
however, possessed of quality. The cognitive principle (chit) and the principle 
of nescience (achit) are His quality and body. The cognitive principle (chit) 
and nescience (achit) are each of them of two kinds according as they happen to 
be either gross or subtle. The subtle cognitive (chit) and non-cognitive 
principle (achit), in the causal state, are transformed into the gross cognition and 
noncognition as effect. Brahman Who is non-bifurcial knowledge being the 
sole Cause, both efficient and material, there exist in Him qualities 
corresponding to such activities. The qualities must be considered as qualifying 
the possessor of them. Therefore, self-consciousness (chit) and unconsciousness 
(achit) are the qualities corresponding to the activities of Brahman as the Cause. 
The body is dependent on, is enjoyed and regulated by, its possessor and is also 
that by which the latter is known. Self-consciousness and unconsciousness 
depend upon, are enjoyed and regulated by, non-bifurcial Brahman, and, as 
effect, are the manifestations of Brahman as Cause. There is no such difference 
in the individual (jiva) soul as deva, man, etc. It is the soul obtaining 
enjoyable bodies, as the appropriate result of his own activities, that makes the 
effect known in terms of such bodies. Therefore, devas, men, etc., are only 
indications of different activities of the soul. The bodies such as those of devas, 
men, etc., are thus modifications or qualities of the soul. The relation in which 
the body stands to the individual (jiva) soul is also that in which the individual 
(jiva) soul stands to the Supreme Soul. In Distinctive Non-dualism three 
categories are admitted, viz., (1) the self-conscious principle (chit) which means 
the individual (jiva), (2) the non-conscious principle (achit) or matter, and 



(3) Godhead (Iswara), the Regulator of spirit (chit) and matter (achit), Who is 
the highest Personality of Narayana. This view categorically denies the 
following: Absolute dualism (kevala-dvaita-vada), absolute non-dualism 
(kevala-advaita-vada) and attributive dualistic non-dualism (vishista-dvaita - 
advaita-vada) . 

The self-conscious principle (chit) or individual (jiva) soul is infinitesimal (arm) 
as opposed to the greatness of Brahman and is an integral part (amsa) of the 
Integer (amsi) or Possessor of the part, viz., the Brahman. This littleness of the 
individual (jiva) soul is directly and explicitly stated in the Scriptures as 
his specific characteristic. It is an integral part of Brahman, just as his body is 
an integral part of the individual soul or as His glow is an integral part or 
quality of the fire or the Sun; or as the quality is an integral part of the substance. 
The individual soul is of three kinds, viz., (1) bound (baddha), (2) 
emancipated (mukta), and (3) eternal (nitya). His proper nature is existence and 
bliss and he is cognisable to himself. 

As regards the non-conscious (achit), according to Ramanuja it is devoid of 
cognition and liable to transformation. It is of three kinds, viz., (1) pure, 
e.g., objects in Vaikuntha, (2) mixed, i.e., constituted of the triple 
mundane qualities, and (3) insubstantial or time. 

Sree Narayana is Godhead. He is distinct from the principle of consciousness 
(chit) and non-consciousness (achit) as substance from quality. He is the 
only cause of the origin, continuance and destruction of the spiritual (chit) 
and material (achit) worlds and of cessation of the cycle of births. He is free 
from every imperfection, full of infinite beneficent qualities, the soul of all, 
the transcendental Brahman, the transcendental Light, the transcendental 
Entity, the Supreme Soul, the only Subject of all Scriptures and the Guide of all 
hearts. The nature of Godhead is fivefold, ,viz., (1) the ultimate Reality (para 
tattva), 

(2) the principle of expansion (byuha tattva) for creation, 
maintenance, destruction, for protecting the bound jivas and showing His mercy 
to worshippers, as Samkarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, (3) the principle 
of the origination of any state (bibhava tattva),viz, Avataras like Rama, 

Nrisinha, etc., (4) the inner Guide (antaryami tattva) as (a) the Supreme Soul 
Who dwells in the hearts of His servants, and as (b) Narayana with Lakshmi 
residing in the hearts of enlightened persons, (5) the principle of symbolic 



manifestation (archa avatara) as Conglomerate Embodiment (Sree Vigraha), 
Name, Form, etc., worshipped by His servants in accordance with their 
respective aptitudes. He seems as if ignorant although All-knowing, as if 
powerless although Allpowerful, as if needing help although His wish is ever 
fully realized, as if needing protection although the Protector, and as if serving 
His devotees although their Master. 

Devotion is the proper method of worshipping Godhead, is extremely pleasing, 
the only thing needful and is of the nature of a particular kind of 
knowledge which produces a distaste for every other thing. Godhead is 
attainable by the soul imbued with devotion. 

Srimat Purnaprajna or Sree Madhvacharya 

Srimat Purnaprajna or Madhvacharya made his appearance in this world in the 
Saka year 1040 in the sacred tirtha known as the Pajaka Kshetra situated 
about eight miles to the south-east of Udupi Kshetra in South Canara. His 
name, before he accepted sanyasa, was Vasudeva. Sree Vasudeva came of a 
Brahman family, his father’s name being Sree Narayana Bhatta, who bore the 
surname of-Madhvageha due to the fact that one of his ancestors, who was an 
immigrant from the country of Ahichchhatra, built his dwelling in the middle 
part of the village-settlement. His mother’s name was Vedabati or Vedavidya. 
Vasudeva accepted renunciation of the ascetic’s staff (danda sanyasa) from 
Sree Achyutapreksha, the disciple of Sree Prajnatirtha, in the line of 
Garudabahan, without obtaining the previous permission of his parents, at the 
age of eleven, and received the designation of ‘Anandatirtha’, or its equivalent 
‘Madhva’. Sree Achyutapreksha at that time happened to be in charge of the 
shrine of Sree Ananteswara, situated in the neighbouring village of 
Rajatapeethapura. The order of spiritual preceptorial succession, according to the 
Madhvas of Rajatapeethapura, of Madhvacharya, is as follows: (1) Sree 
Narayana as Hansa, (2) Four-faced Brahma, (3) Chatuhsanah, (4) Durvasa, (5) 
Pasatirtha Yati, (6) Satyaprajna, (7) Prajnatirtha, (8) Achyutapreksha, and (9) 
Madhva. It is not our purpose in this place to enter into the details of his career 
which was long and eventful. Sreemad Madhva was the worshipper of Boy 
Krishna, whose holy Form, miraculously rescued from a sinking boat, was 
solemnly installed by him at Sree Udupi Kshetra and still receives worship from 
the sannyasins, his successors in the disciplic line. Sree Madhvacharya had a 
most powerful physique. He journeyed twice to Sree Badarika and visited all the 



principal tirthas of India where he preached his doctrines and engaged in 
successful disputations with the leading scholars of the rival schools. Sree 
Madhvacharya disappeared from this world in the 79 th year of his advent. 

Sree Madhvacharya wrote numerous works and established many Maths with 
organized service and worship for the purpose of spreading his bifurcial 
theistic view. As many as thirty- eight separate works, all in Sanskrit, from his 
pen, are still extant. The literature thus brilliantly inaugurated swelled to 
immense proportions by subsequent additions of many valuable works by his 
successors. 

The teaching of Sree Madhvacharya is found summarized in a short verse which 
is regarded by the members of the school as giving a correct view of his 
position and may be rendered thus: “Divine Vishnu is the Highest of all. The 
world is true. Between Godhead, jiva and matter there exists fivefold eternal 
reciprocal difference. The jivas (individual souls) are the servants of Sree Hari. 
There exists gradation of fitness among jivas. The manifestation of the function 
in conformity with the proper nature of the jiva is emancipation (mukti). 

The practice of the realized function conformably with the soul’s own proper 
nature is pure, unalloyed or causeless devotion. Sound, inference and direct 
perception constitute the triple evidence. Sree Hari is the only Object Who is 
knowable by the whole body of the Scriptures; or, in other words, realization of 
Godhead is possible only by following the path of the heard revealed sound 
(srud). ” The whole of this position has been accepted specifically by Sripad 
Baladeva Vidyabhusana in his ‘Prameya Ratnavali\ This definitely establishes 
the descent of Sree Gaudiya Sampradaya, that follows Sree Krishna Chaitanya, 
from the Madhva school and justifies its descriptive title Madhva-Gaudiya (or 
Brahma-Madhva-Gaudiya) Sampradaya, current among the devotees. 

According to Sree Madhvacharya, as has already been stated, Sree Vishnu is the 
Highest Entity. Reality is of two kinds, viz., (1) self-regulated and 
(2) subordinate. Vishnu is the one perfectly self-regulated Entity. He is the 
Abode of infinite, free-from defect, beneficent, qualities. He is all-powerful, 
autocrat, the Regulator of the animate and inanimate worlds, from the tip of 
finger-nail to the top of hair the holy embodied Form of existence, intelligence 
and bliss, cognizant and delighting in His own real nature and without any 
subjective heterogeneity. There is no distinction between His body and Himself 
as the possessor of body. There is absolute identity between His Body, Quality, 
Action and Name. That is to say, there is no dividing line between His Name, 



Form, Quality and Activity (Leela). He is Eternal, the Regulator of all, the Lord 
of all, Iswara (Ruler) of even Brahma, Mahesa and Lakshmi and for this reason 
He is the Highest Godhead, i.e., God of all the gods. He is in every Age and 
country the holy embodied Form of the Possessor of all pure energy. Those 
persons who notice any distinction or distinction and non-distinction in the 
Name, Form, Quality and Activity of the Avataras viz., Fish, Tortoise, etc., 
certainly enter the realm of gross ignorance (tamas). There is no particle of 
absence of self-consciousness in Sree Hari. His holy Form possesses hand, foot, 
mouth, belly, etc., all those being of the nature of pure bliss. From Him proceed 
always creation, stability, destruction, the course of the souls, knowledge, 
bondage, emancipation, etc. Divine Vishnu exists eternally as the Archetype of 
all individual souls who are His differentiated parts. In other words, in the 
realm full of the pastimes of the pure intelligence, an endless series of 
differentiated souls from Brahma to the lowest insect endowed with the 
embodied forms of the principles of existence, cognition and bliss are eternally 
existent. They are the unqualified counterparts of the corresponding Forms of 
Vishnu Who, in His eternal and various Forms, is their Archetype. The 
individual souls in Vaikuntha are the substantive, unqualified reflections of the 
corresponding Divine Forms. Individual souls are differentiated from Godhead. 
The soul is an embodiment of the principles of cognition and bliss in a small 
measure, which principles exist in their fullest measure in the Person of 
Godhead. The material bodies of the bound souls do not correspond to their 
original pure spiritual forms, and, therefore, from the nature of the physical 
forms of the bound souls the nature of their original forms cannot be inferred. 
Sree Hari has two kinds of constituent parts (amsas) viz., (1) differentiated 
counterparts, e.g., individual souls (jivas) in Vaikuntha, and (2) undifferentiated 
parts of Himself, viz., the Divine manifestations (Avataras), e.g., in the divine 
Forms of the Fish, Tortoise, etc. In His pastimes Divine Vishnu manifests 
Himself in a fourfold Form, viz., Vasudeva, Samkarsana, Pradyumna and 
Aniruddha, for the purpose of such activities as creation, etc. In the Form of 
Pradyumna He creates the world, in the Form of Aniruddha maintains, and in the 
Form of Samkarsana, destroys it. In the Form of Vasudeva He delivers souls. 

The functions of creation and destruction are carried out by Divine Vishnu by 
means of gods exercising delegated power, or by the highest grade of souls 
exercising similar power. Vishnu as Pradyumna in this manner endows Brahma 
with the creative power and as Samkarsana confers on Rudra the power of 
destruction. He himself as Aniruddha exercises the power of maintenance, and 
as Vasudeva confers deliverance. Divine Vishnu from time to time appears in 
this world as Avataras in the Forms of Fish, Tortoise, etc. In the twenty-four 



Forms as Keshava, etc., and Vasudeva, etc., He is the Regulator of the gods who 
represent the twenty-four principles of the universe, and in the five Forms as 
Vasudeva, Samkarsana, Pradyumna, Aniruddha, and Narayana, He governs the 
five encasements. He regulates the four states of differentiated souls, viz., (1) 
waking, (2) dreaming, (3) sleeping, (4) unbound, in the four Forms of Visva, 
Taijas, Prajna and Turiya.. As the Soul and the Soul of souls He is the Regulator 
of the gross and spiritual bodies, corresponding to the real nature of the souls 
and, remaining manifest in all the limbs of souls as Ananta, He rules over them. 
He is the Source Who imparts their initiative to the gods representing the 
principles of the universe, and to the different senses. He is not responsible for 
the meritorious and sinful acts of jivas to which He employs them according 
to their fitness and in exercise of their freedom of will. Although He appears in 
the world in the various Forms of Fish, Tortoise, Man, etc., His birth and 
activities or bodies are not phenomenal, notwithstanding their material 
appearance to the vision of bound jivas. His Avatara are of two kinds, viz., (1) 
Embodiments of knowledge, and (2) Embodiments of power. Sree Krishna is the 
Appearance (Avatara) of Divine cognition and power in conjunction. In such 
Divine Appearances as those of Dhanvantari, etc., Krishna’s power of showing 
mercy to His devotees alone is manifest. Sree Vaikuntha is the eternal Divine 
Abode of Vishnu. At the beginning of creation the twin Divine Abodes, viz., the 
White Island (Sveta-dvipa) and the Divine Seat in the form of Sree 
Ananta (Anantasana), appear in this world. Sree Lakshmi is the beloved Divine 
Consort of Vishnu. She accompanies Her Lord to this world in His Appearances 
and is associated with Him in various Forms with the infinite reciprocal Forms 
of her Lord. The different names of Sree Lakshmi are: Sree, Bhu, Durga, Maya, 
Jaya, Kriti, Santi, Ambhrani, Sita, Dakshina, Jayanti, etc., each having 
distinctive functions. Vishnu creates the material universe at the beginning of 
every cycle (kalpa) using the eternal inanimate force, that has no beginning, as 
the material cause. This world is neither non-existent, nor false, nor 
‘momentary’. The different objects are limited in duration as regards their 
existence in their particular forms, but are eternal as regards their constituent 
principle. 

There is categorical difference (1) between the individual soul (jiva) and 
Godhead, (2) between one individual (jiva) and another, (3) between matter and 
Godhead, (4) between individual soul (jiva) and matter and (5) between one 
form of matter and another form. Sree Madhvacharya accepts this 
fivefold difference as real. 



Individual souls (jivas) are divided into three classes, according as their original 
nature is made of either (1) intelligence and bliss, or (2) of a mixture 
of intelligence and joy and misery of ignorance, or (3) of unmixed misery 
and ignorance. Individual souls (jivas) are provided with physical and 
mental bodies in accordance with their actions of the previous cycle (kalpa), at 
the beginning of material creation. Individual souls (jivas) are infinite in 
number. One’s proper nature or the capacity of attaining to it, is eternal and 
belongs eternally to all individual souls. It is the primal cause of all efforts of 
all individual souls. Action (karma), although destructible, is eternal in 
the continuity of its flow or sequence. Previously performed activity 
(karma), which is without a beginning, is the second cause. There is a third 
cause in the shape of the effort at the time of the performance of the act. All 
these are subject to Vishnu, Lord of the material energy (maya). In other words 
Godhead awards the worldly course of individual souls by means of these three 
causes, but they have no power over Him as He is the Lord of material Energy 
(Maya). Liberation (mukti) is the realization of their own proper natures by 
persons endowed with the luminous, self-expressive (sattvic) quality, on the 
dissolution of the symbolic material body, by the practice of devotion. It is not 
something adventitious but only the continued establishment of the individual 
soul in his own proper nature. The eternal material cases, super-imposed on the 
real or spiritual nature of the soul, are two in number, viz., (1) the case forged by 
the soul and (2) the envelope bestowed by the material energy of Godhead 
(Maya). When Godhead is favourably disposed He destroys completely the 
coating of nescience caused by the soul and removes the screen of the material 
energy (maya) which is a gift of the Divinity. Thereupon the soul is enabled to 
see with his spiritual eye the Supreme Person dwelling in his own heart. The 
devotion that is aroused after the beatific vision is the highest or unalloyed, 
being devoid of all foreign impulses in the shape of physical activity (karma), 
etc. It is only by devotion that the favour of Godhead is attained. This leads to 
liberation (mukti), being the attainment of the Feet of Vishnu. This is followed 
by devotion in her real, proper form which is not the means but the goal. 

The initial stage in the process, is listening with faith to the words of 
Scriptures glorifying the greatness of Godhead, from the lips of devotees 
(sadhus). 

Sree Madhvacharya admits the authority of the triple evidence of (1) direct 
perception, (2) inference, and (3) revelation (agama). The last is sub-divided into 
(1) those Scriptures that are not made by any person, and (2) those so made. To 
the first of these groups belong the Vedas such as Rik, etc., Upanishad, the 



formulae that deliver from mental function (mantram), Brahmanas, 
the concluding portion of the Veda (parisista), etc. To the second group 
are assigned History- (Itihasa), supplementary accounts (Purana), 
fivefold knowledge ( pancha-ratra), etc. The Puranas, etc., help in understanding 
the real significance of the Vedas. The Puranas are of three kinds, viz., (1) 
Sattvika, (2) Rajasika, and (3) Tamasika. The Sattvika Puranas, such as 
Sreemad Bhagavatam, etc., are alone admissible as evidence of the Truth. If any 
portions of the Rajasa Puranas are in conformity with the statements of the 
Sattvika 

Puranas those may also be accepted as evidence. Those parts of the Sattvika 
Puranas that express ideas contrary to the sattvika view, were intended 
for deluding the atheists (daityas), and should not be accepted by 
righteous persons. The Tamasa Puranas were concocted for deluding evil- 
minded persons (daityas). All Puranas, in so far as they support the sattvic view, 
are admissible as evidence. The following views of Sree Madhvacharya are also 
interesting. The servant of Vishnu (Vaishnava), the All-pervasive Lord, is the 
highest of all animate beings Qivas). The worship of Vishnu alone is to be 
performed. All worship of other gods is forbidden. Everything is gained by 
uttering the Name of Hari. The Vaishnava, even if he be sprung from a Chandala 
family, is the revered of all. Vaishnavas are to be served with zeal and no offense 
must be permitted against them. The Brahmana is recognized by 
straightforwardness, the Sudra by duplicity of conduct. 

Sree Chaitanya is the disciplic successor of Sree Madhvacharya and ultimately 
of Sree Brahma, the original Founder after whom the community 
(sampradaya) is named as the Brahma Sampradaya. The order of spiritual 
succession (amnaya) up to the present time from Sree Brahma, as preserved in 
the Brahma Gaudiya Sampradaya, is as follows: (1) Sree Krishna, (2) Brahma, 
(3) Narada, (4) Vyasa, (5) Madhwa, (6) Padmanabha, (7) Nrihari, (8) Madhava, 
(9) Akshobhya, (10) Jayatirtha, (11) Jnanasindhu, (12) Dayanidhi, (13) 
Vidyanidhi, (14) Rajendra, (1 5) Jayadharma, (16) Purushottama, (17) 
Vyasatirtha, (18) Lakshmipati, (19) Madhavendra Puri, (20) Iswara 
(Advaita, Nityananda), (21) Sree Chaitanya, (22) (Swarupa, Sanatana) Rupa, 

(23) (Jiva) Raghunatha, (24) Krishnadasa, (25) Narottama, (26) Viswanatha, 

(27) (Baladeva) Jagannatha, (28) (Bhaktivinode) Gaurakishore, (29) 

Sree Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Sree Barshabhanavidayitadas. All these 
are paramahansas and Sree Chaitanya’s undifferentiated servitors. The writer 
is devoid of all aptitude for service and endeavours to have his mind humbly 



fixed on the lotus feet of Sree Guru Sree Siddhanta Saraswati Thakur, as 
the unworthy object of his causeless mercy and of his associated counterparts. 

The views of the four Founder-Acharyas of the respective Vaishnava 
communities (sampradayas) briefly noticed above, stand in such close 
and organic relation to the teaching of Sree Chaitanya and to one another that 
their relationship will be best brought out in course of the narrative and at 
the proper place, in the light of the philosophy of Sree Chaitanya which, as I 
have already noticed, reconciles, harmonizes and perfects them. For the present 
it will be sufficient for our purpose to notice in regard to these four schools 
that the system of Sree Chaitanya, although it is identical with none of them, 
either wholly or partially admits the special excellence of certain features of 
each. Thus, for example, Sree Chaitanya accepts more or less the eternal 
specific Form of the Divinity as Embodiment of all-existence, all-knowledge and 
allbliss sachchidananda nitya Bigraha) of Madhva, the postulations of 
Ramanuja regarding Divine Power, the principle of unalloyed non-dualism and 
of Godhead as The All of His Own’ and the eternal dualistic-monotheism 
of Nimbarka which last has been perfected by Sree Chaitanya into the 
truly scientific Truth of the Doctrine of inconceivable simultaneous distinction 
and non difference. 

The act of Sree Chaitanya in preferring the Brahma community (sampradaya) by 
His entry into it as Disciple, to which Sree Madhvacharya also belongs, to the 
other Vaishnava schools, is explained by the fact that the doctrine of unalloyed 
differentialism propounded by Sree Madhvacharya which makes the mutual 
difference, as between, Godhead, individual soul (jiva) and the material world, 
definite and permanent and also recognizes their eternal separate existence, 
keeps all individual souls (jiva) most clearly and frankly at a great distance from 
the fell disease of absolute monism which is the opposite pole, being the 
empirical denial of the essence of all theistic thought passing itself off as theism 
to the insidious seductions of which most worldly people are so easily liable to 
succumb. We shall return to this important subject in its proper place. 

It is the empiricists who are responsible for the origination of the current notion 
that theism is a product of a particular stage of material civilization in 
its progressive onward march. It will be our purpose to prove in the next 
chapter that such a view is opposed to all historical experience. It is no doubt 
true that the revelationists do not admit the applicability of the theory of 
evolution in its present form to spiritual subjects as it does not recognize the 



existence of any other entity except matter and mind. The history of spiritual 
evolution is connected with the progress of material civilization correspondingly 
and negatively, and not causally, the latter only serving to bring out that aspect 
of the former which happens to be the most intelligible to itself at the stage. 

This difference is wholly overlooked by materialistic evolutionists and no less by 
the so-called critical school of historians who have essayed to treat of 
spiritual events. The transcendental aspect of theism is the oldest fact known to 
history and, philosophically speaking, is incapable of being evolved out of 
the empirical consciousness. The abandonment of no historical principle worth 
the name, is involved in the recognition of this fact as a fundamental and 
axiomatic truth even on the evidence, although necessarily negative in character, 
of our empirical experience as will appear from an impartial consideration of 
the historical facts contained in the next chapter. 



8 Historical Vaishnavism 


The Scope of History does not extend to the transcendental for the simple reason 
that History deals exclusively with the phenomena of this world. The historical 
view of any Divine event is, under the circumstances, only that of the deluded 
soul under the thralldom of the material Energy. It is not its business to deal with 
anything that is outside the ordinary sensuous experience of men in general. 
Therefore, we cannot expect modern historians, who are limited to the above 
view of their function, to sympathize with, or even to consider seriously, the 
subject of this work as one that belongs properly to their particular branch of 
knowledge. But in spite of this purely secular attitude of modern historians they 
have been unable to rule religion altogether out of their subject. There have been 
empiric historians who have, in the spirit of specialists, without discarding the 
secular outlook which it is really impossible for them to do without denying their 
avowed function as investigators of a branch of empiric knowledge, attempted to 
isolate and treat ‘exclusively’ of religious history. While professing all due 
respect for their methods, without ignoring their necessary limitations, we 
propose to employ their method, divested of unnecessary and hostile narrowness, 
in this chapter, for the purpose of proving our proposition that the worship of 
Vishnu as transcendental Godhead has been prevalent from time immemorial. 

It is of course not possible to treat exhaustively in the course of a short chapter a 
subject that is both large and, by its nature, controversial. That effort must 
be reserved for a separate work. I shall be content in this chapter with supplying 
a rough sketch of the account of the worship of Vishnu as it has prevailed 
from the earliest times, on the evidence supplied by the religious books directly, 
by the course of the evolution of ritual and the activities of 
outstanding personalities. 

The Rig-Veda is regarded on all hands as being the oldest of the existing books. 
The worship of Vishnu is found mentioned in the very first mantrams of 
this work, which contain a reference to the Vamana (Dwarf) Avatara of Vishnu. 
The beginning of the compilation of the Rik mantrams may accordingly 
be considered as at least subsequent to the Vamana Avatara. The subject of the 
ten Avataras of Vishnu will be considered from another point of view in the 
next chapter. The ten Avataras are mentioned everywhere in the 
following chronological order, viz, (1) Matsya (Fish), (2) Kurma (Tortoise), (3) 
Varaha (Boar), (4) Nrisimha (Man-Lion), (5) Vamana (Dwarf), (6) Parasu-Rama, 



(7) Rama, (8) Balarama, (9) Buddha, and (10) Kalki. When the Rig-Veda was 
being compiled the first five Avataras of Vishnu had already taken place. 

Objection may be taken to the above on the ground that there is no mention of 
the other Avataras in the Rig-Veda, which are mentioned only in the 
Puranas which are subsequent to the Vedic period. 

The Puranas assumed their present form long after the compilation of the Rig- 
Veda. But the original Purannas were written in very old Brahmi which has 
survived in the language of the mantrams that have been preserved in the 
Vedas while the original books themselves have disappeared completely. The 
present Puranas which are in the Sanskrit language were written later and 
replaced the older works from which much of their accounts was derived. Many 
of the events recorded in the Puranas occurred in the pre-Vedic Age. This is 
well known to the critical historians and the subject has been treated with ability 
by an English scholar Pargiter, in his recent work ‘The ancient Indian 
historical tradition’. 

There is another striking point of difference between the Vedas and the Puranas. 
The Vedas do not contain really much matter that is of the nature of the 
supernatural. They refer to Natural phenomena and display an almost exclusive 
attachment to mundane advantages in their prayers to the various gods, who are 
regarded as presiding over the different forces of physical Nature. This 
naturalistic or materialistic character of the Vedic religion has been noticed by all 
Vedic scholars. The singular absence of the really supernatural factor in the 
oldest existing religious book of the world has not received sufficient critical 
attention. The Puranas are full of the supernatural. To the so-called critical 
historian this has always appeared as the special disqualification of the Puranas 
as a source for sober history. But this feature is capable of a very different and 
far more rational interpretation. 

I have already mentioned that the worship of Vishnu occurs in the Vedas along 
with that of the other gods. If we direct our close attention to the character of the 
hymns of the Rig-Veda we would notice a great difference between the hymns 
addressed to Vishnu and those addressed to the other gods. All the hymns, 
without a single exception, that are addressed to the other gods, are full of purely 
mundane expectations and references. All the hymns, without a single exception, 
addressed to Vishnu are absolutely free from all mundane reference. The 
worship of Vishnu is absolutely pure. Vishnu alone is Infinite, all the other gods 



are limited. Vishnu is also a personal God, as the other gods. The finite gods are 
approachable by their worshippers by limited references. But Vishnu 
is recognized as unapproachable by mundane reference. 

As Vishnu was not available by esoteric efforts, this led to the formulation of the 
worship of the other gods. Vishnu was never a god of Nature. The other gods 
were gods of Nature. These formed, as it were, the esoteric faces of Vishnu and 
were regarded by their worshippers as independent of Vishnu. From the earliest 
times the worship of these gods had existed alongside the worship of Vishnu. 

The Vedic religion viewed in this light will appear to have been of the nature of a 
later reaction against the older pure worship of Vishnu. It is, in fact, the 
first movement of the anti theistic thought, of which we possess any written 
record. 

This establishes the identity of Vishnu, and the worship of Vishnu, of the Rig- 
Veda with the Vaishnavism of the Puranas and of the present Age. This fact has 
been most clearly established by the Vaishnava Acharyas, within the 
narrower historical period, from the time of Adi Vishnuswami onwards. 

An attempt was made in the subsequent period to mix up the pure worship of 
Krishna with the other worships. This attempt was exposed by the 
Vaishnava acharyas who helped to restore from time to time the pure eternal 
religion. 

Historically speaking, therefore, the anti-Vaishnavite thought is almost as old as 
the Vaishnavite, but not quite so old. 

The Vedic religion, which, in its fruitive aspect, degenerated into ceremonialism 
and aimed solely at trivial worldly advantages, led to a schism in the ranks of the 
anti-theists marked by the rise of Buddhism. Gautama Buddha belonged to the 
sixth century B.C. Buddha is directly anti-Vedic and himself belonged to the 
Vaishnavite school. But his teaching was misunderstood by his atheistical 
followers who severed all connection with the chain of the Avataras of Vishnu to 
which their Founder had belonged. This explains the philosophical affinity of 
extant atheistical Buddhism with the polytheism of the Vedas as expounded by 
Sankara, in spite of the traditionally supposed opposition of Buddha to the 
Vedas. 


The major portion of the Vedas, therefore, constituting what is known 



technically as the Karma Kandiya part (i.e. that portion which is devoted 
to fruitive activities), is polytheistic or, more truly, anti-theistic. But its ritual 
was not exclusively its own. The Yajna. or sacrifice was originally a form 
of Vaishnavite worship, but it was subsequently adopted as the basis of the anti- 
theistic worship and in that form elaborated into its later complex forms. But the 
Yajna itself was not the oldest form of the Vishnuvite worship. The original form 
of the Vishnuvite worship was dhyana (i.e. meditation corresponding to solitary 
rationalistic worship the term means that mode which is established through 
argument). This mode of worship is represented in its pure form by Astabakra. It 
became mixed up with mundane references in the later Hatha Yoga. But at first it 
was not so. It is the form of worship that corresponds to the inactive or the 
meditative temper. This was the earliest theistic form of worship. The Yajna, 
‘sacrifice’ was the next stage and represents the active temper. The institution of 
yajna developed into that of archana or ritualistic worship. The sankirtana 
propounded by Sree Chaitanya replaces archana as the final form of Vishnuvite 
worship. This order of development is in accordance with the shloka of the 
Sreemad Bhagavatam (Xll-3-52, What is obtained in the Satya Age by means of 
dhyana, in the Treta Age by yajna, in Dvapara by archana, may be gained in the 
Kali Age by chanting or kirtana of Hari. 

The necessity for the preservation of the older Puranas was probably less 
imperatively felt after the composition of the Mahabharata in which 
were incorporated their principal contents in a condensed form. The present 
Puranas derived their accounts mainly from the Mahabharata, with later 
embellishments and interpolations. The Mahabharata and the Puranas thus 
contain the oldest historical tradition of India which is not in conformity with the 
extant portion of the Vedas either as regards their narrative or their religious 
tenets. A group of Puranas is specially devoted to the history and doctrines of 
Vaishnavism, which also appears more or less in all the Puranas. In this history 
is found the supernatural account of the numerous mundane Appearances 
(Avataras) of Vishnu. 

We have already stated that the hymns of the Rig-Veda that are addressed to 

Vishnu, contain no mundane reference. Vishnu is considered as being 

outside physical Nature. In the hymns He is also spoken of as the Infinite and the 

Divinity in His fullness and perfection. As He happens to be Infinite He is also 

to be worshipped not by any limited reference but infinitely or by the fullness of 

His worshippers. But although Vishnu is thus believed to have been 

situated beyond this universe, His occasional ‘descent’ or Avatara into this nether 



world, was also known to the Rishis of the Rig-Veda. The fifth of the well- 
known ten Avataras of Vishnu, is actually mentioned in several passages of the 
Rig-Veda. The Vamana Avatara of Vishnu appears to be nearest to the Age of the 
Rig-Veda and might have preceded its compilation by an interval of time which 
was sufficiently short to allow its impression to persist in the memory of those 
who were not very keen regarding His worship. Vamana is the last Avatara of 
Vishnu in the Satya Age. 

The fact that the accounts of these Avataras of Vishnu that are found in the 
Pur anas, happen to be supernatural need not prejudice us against 
their authenticity. Such a procedure will lead us to taboo the Bible and the 
Koran and Sree Chaitanya Charitamrita and to court the misfortune of leaving 
out of the consideration of history the substance of religion or to misstate it 
as unhistorical, thereby condemning the subject of History itself to the class 
of purely atheistical studies, and, therefore, fit to be shunned as tainted 
by partisan bias against Godhead or even as a snare, by all theistically 
disposed persons. History would indeed be incomplete, unwholesome and 
meaningless if it left out the all-important subject and stunt itself to the purely 
mundane aspect of our experience, under the untenable, mischievous and 
atheistical plea of scientific necessity. 

But the mundane and the spiritual should of course be kept rigorously separate, 
as they really are so by their nature. Mundane matters should certainly 
be represented as mundane. They should not be allowed to pass in the name of 
the spiritual. This is the eternal line of demarcation that separates the material 
from the spiritual, i.e., the temporary and the untrue from the eternal and 
the absolutely True. If the office of the historian be to investigate into the 
Real Truth he cannot possibly find Him if he rigorously confines himself to 
the manipulation of untruth for his own particular satisfaction. By adopting such 
a procedure he will fail in his duty towards his subject, towards himself 
and others. Therefore, the very first thing which he ought to do is to abandon 
once for all the so-called critical, or as it too often means, the sneering and 
worldly, attitude towards the supernatural for the utterly foolish reason that it 
does not obey those narrow canons gratuitously set up by himself and which 
are inapplicable to the Truth by being willfully based on the principles of 
limited space and time and an insatiable desire for the attainment of 
worldly advantages. 


If this reasonable attitude of our natural partiality for the Real Truth, is adopted, 



our eyes would open of themselves and begin to distinguish between the grain 
and the chaff in the treatment of the history of the world. When the Vaishnava 
Acharyas declare that the only way, in which the individual soul engrossed in the 
materialistic outlook (bound jiva), can get rid of his ignorance of the Real Truth 
Who alone matters, is the constant perusal, listening to and contemplation of the 
supernatural Activities of the Descents (Avataras) of the Divinity, with faith and 
reverence, they do not refer by these terms to the erroneous concoctions of the 
human imagination but to the only history of the Divinity that is alone true in the 
judgment of those who are acquainted with it, both by realization in their life and 
by the study of the history of the truth. The objection that what is supernatural 
cannot exist at all under the conditions of time and space and, are, therefore, 
unreal and fictitious, is also contradicted by the actual experience of mankind 
who have, in the teeth of such objections, always believed in such happenings 
for the sound reason that nothing should be impossible with Godhead. 

Once the force of the above argument is really admitted we are immediately 
relieved of the illogical bias that leads us to declare that history does not 
prove that the supernatural had ever happened at all. We should rather say that 
the supernatural never appeared as such to the blinded vision of unbelievers 
who have always formed the majority, as they do now, in this godless world. 

But such was the inexplicable force of those very, supernatural events that 
their reality was admitted by the best, i.e., by unworldly and pure minds of all 
Ages, and, on their authority, they have continued to be believed generally, 
although crudely, by all overwhelming majority of the peoples of all subsequent 
Ages. 

Mahabharata — The prejudice of the critical school is due to its failure to 
distinguish between the supernatural and the unnatural or anti natural. This has 
led to the adumbration of the doctrine of miracles. The Divine law is 
never broken and is sufficiently capacious to accommodate within itself with 
perfect consistency both the natural and the supernatural. Those who suppose 
that they can detect a breach of the Law on the part of Godhead for the purpose 
of convincing (?) unbelievers, are sadly deluded, indeed. The 
supernatural happens to be supernatural because it is above or beyond the natural 
or limited. Anything that is limited, whether it is called a ‘miracle’ or by any 
other name, cannot be anything but limited. And for this reason the supernatural 
lies beyond our present limited understanding. The Avataras of Vishnu belong 
to the category of the supernatural and cannot be perceived by any of the 
senses or be apprehended by the materialized understanding if such Avatara 



or Vishnu's descent into the finite world takes place even before our very eyes 
and in these days of the noon-day light (or darkness?) of almost 
unqualified empiricism. 

It is not the paucity of materials, which exist and have existed in abundance from 
the remotest antiquity stored up in the pages of the innumerable Scriptures, that 
is the difficulty of the historian of theism. The difficulty is to convince the 
sophisticated reader regarding its proper place in History. 

Before the advent of Buddha the Vaishnavite or theistic thought had already been 
recorded in a vast literature. The older Pur anas still existed and the Mahabharata 
had been recently compiled. The Vedas in their Samhita portion could not avoid 
all reference to it and the Upanishads are altogether theistic, containing, as they 
do, the rich harvest of the realizations of the Age of contemplation. The 
Vaishnavite thought maintains its distinctive character in the sutra period and the 
Grihya and Sautra sutras are full of Puranic matter. These together with the 
Tapanis and the Vedangas, which had their theistic group of works, formed the 
source from which the Vaishnava Acharyas have drawn their materials from the 
third century B.C. onwards within the comparatively recent period of recorded 
History. 

The present classical Sanskrit language came into use about four thousand years 
ago. It rendered obsolete the older works and replaced them by books written in 
the new language. 

Anti-Vishnuvite thought is as old as the beginning of history. The Avataras of 
Vishnu are declared to have been due to the prevalence of atheism. The portions 
of the Vedas devoted to the cult of fruitive works, as we have already observed, 
belong to the anti-Vishnuvite school under the garb of friendly coexistence. This 
is an ordinary and very old rule. On the side of philosophy we find a continuous 
development of atheism which runs parallel to the Vishnuvite thought and 
culminates in the atheistical schools of the subsequent period under the garb of 
Scriptural sanction. This mixing up of theism with atheism in the Scriptures 
themselves, is quite natural and is due to the cunning of a group of intellectual 
atheists. 

But within the atheistic camp this caution was not observed by all. Buddha was 

opposed to the fruitive yajnas of the Vedas and was Himself a 

leading Vishnuvite having been recognized as the ninth ,Avatara of Vishnu by 



the theistic school. But his pseudo-followers, misunderstanding the anti- 
Vedic attitude of their Master and by abusing the method of abstruse 
discussion which He had employed against the sophists, drifted into nihilism 
which was by that time a recognized body of opinion handed down by a regular 
chain of former teachers. The active impulse which had produced the yajna form 
of worship was restated by Buddha to counteract its abuse at the hands of 
the fruitive school of the Vedists, so as to include ethical conduct. But 
Buddha’s followers separated ethics from its theistic purpose and applied it in its 
purely mundane form to the attainment of a negative spiritual result. 

This misunderstanding the active principle underlying the method of 
worshipping Godhead by yajnas practiced by the early theists, by those who 
professed to follow Buddha, was fraught with far-reaching consequences to 
humanity from the effects of which the modern world is still grievously 
suffering. 

Just as the intellectual distortion of the principle underlying yajna led to the 
atheistical ethics of the pseudo-Buddhists, a somewhat similar distortion of 
the principle underlying Vishnuvite archana led to the development of the cult 
of the Jains. 

The archana as the method of Divine worship was elaborated in the Agama 
consisting of its twenty-four Samhitas. The Vedas are in old Sanskrit and 
were for that reason called the Nigama. The Agama was so named as having 
been written in the then new language to distinguish it from the Nigama. 

The Vishnuvite Agama bears the name of Pancharatra . The Pancharatra 
contains the rules for the regulation of the spiritual life of the Vaishnavas. These 
are the sattvika Tantras. There are also rajasa and tamasa Tantras. 

The term Pancharatra means that which contains knowledge about the five 
subjects, viz., tapa, pundra, nama, mantram and worship. It is the sattvata 
or Vishnuvite Tantra. The term Tantra, which means that which elaborates, 
is ordinarily applied to the rajasa and tamasa Tantras. The Pancharatra 
instructs regarding the application of those theistic principles which are declared 
in the spiritual portion of the Vedas, illustrated concretely in the narratives of 
the Puranas and collated in the Sutras. 

All those are the extensions of the real Veda. If the Veda is conceived as a person 
the Upanishads may be regarded as his intellect and the Vedangas as 
his different organs for the performance of his function (karmanga). The 



Vedangas are six in number, viz, (1) Siksha, i.e, intonation, (2) Kalpa, i.e., 
procedure, (3) Nirukta, i.e, dictionary, (4) Vyakarana, i.e., the science of sound, 
(5) Jyotisha, i.e, astronomy including astrology dealing with space, time and 
direction, and (6) Chhandas. These furnished the starting point of the various 
physical sciences of the subsequent rationalistic Age in which there was a great 
advance in practical facilities of all kinds. 

The aphoristic literature which took upon itself the collation of the Vedangas, led 
to the Grihya and Srauta sutras, the forerunners of the Pancharatra or 
the Tantra literature. 

The Dharmashastras or Smritis belong to a later period. The twenty 
Dharmashastras which are also divided into the sattvika, rajasa and tamasa, 
are concerned with the regulation of the whole life of individuals. The 
sattvika smritis, viz. , those of Vashista, Harita, Vyasa, Parasara, Bharadvaja, 
Kasyapa, are categorically distinguished from the rest. The clue to this 
distinction is furnished by such old shlokas as state definitely the principle that 
the king possessed the authority to frame laws for the regulation of the secular 
affairs of the people but had no power over the Brahmanas and the Vaishnavas. 
"Sarvatra skhitadesah sapta-dwipaikadandadhrik Anyatra brahmana 
kuladanyatra chytagotratah (Bk. 4XXI.12.) The rajasa and tamasa 
Dharmashastras were made by royal authority and are of a miscellaneous and 
secular character. They had no jurisdiction over the intellectual communities. 

The Dharmashastras do not belong to the class of revealed literature. The 
Pancharatras bear the names of persons to whom they were spoken by Narayana 
and are in the form of conversations between Siva and Parvati. 

The Pancharatra s are thus an authoritative expansion and supplement of the 
Veda (Truth or Absolute knowledge ) in the same way as the Puranas. There 
are very early statements in the body of the technical Vedic literature itself to 
the effect that the Puranas are an integral part of the revealed literature. 

Those passages have been pointed out by the later Vishnuvite Acharyas. It 
is specifically stated in the Mahabharata and by Manu that the Veda should 
be supplemented by the ‘Itihasa ’ (History) and the ‘Purana ’. Because the Veda 
is supplemented by the Purana, therefore the latter is called ‘Purana ’. 

The Madhyandin Smriti classes ‘Itihasa’, and ‘Purana’, with the Vedic 
Samhitas, as forming the body of the revealed literature. 


The principal sattvata, i.e., theistic or Vishnuvite, Pancharatra or Tantric, works 



are the Hayasirsha, Prahlada and, especially, Narada, Pancharatra. The names 
of the six sattvata Puranas are Vishnu, Narada, Bhagavata, Garuda, Padma 
and Varaha. The six rajasa Puranas are named Brahmanda, 

Brahmavaivarta, Markandeya, Bhabishyat, Vamana and Brahma. The tamasa 
Puranas are Matsya, Kurma, Linga, Siva, Skanda and Agni. The sattvika 
Puranas are stated to confer emancipation, the rajasa lead to paradise, and the 
tamas to hell. This principle holds in regard to the Tantras. The distinction 
between sattvika, rajasika and tamasika shastras is also defined in another way. 
The sattvika shastras are those that establish that Godhead is full of all the 
Qualities and is the Highest of all. Those shastras that declare the superiority of 
Brahma, Agni and Saraswati, are rajasika. Those that state the superiority of 
Siva and recommend the Sivalingam as object of worship, are tamasika Tantras. 
Sattvika persons worship Vishnu, rajasika persons Brahma and the tamasika 
worship Rudra (vide Padma and Garuda Puranas). The superiority of the sattvika 
Purana. is nowhere explicitly challenged. 

The position we have reached so far may be summarized as follows. Godhead is 
the Divine Person who is supernatural, supersensuous and situated beyond 
the utmost limits of empiric knowledge. Knowledge is of two kinds, viz., (1) 
para, i.e, transcendental or absolute, and (2) apara, that is, non-final. Rik, 
Saman, Yajus, Atharva and Siksha, Kalpa, Vyakarana, Nirukta, Chhandas and 
Jyotisha, etc., and all those branches of knowledge that follow these, belong to 
the category of the apara-Vidya. But Godhead is never accessible to this 
limiting knowledge which is subject to modification by time. The shastras in 
which the Unchangeable and Absolute Entity is the subject-matter of 
investigation, belong to the category of ‘para-Vidya’. The sattvata shastras 
belong to this class. 

Thus theistic knowledge is found to be present, only to a very slight extent, in 
the extant Vedic Samhitas and their adjective literature. The originals of 
those parts of the Vedic works from which the sattvata Puranas once derived 
their theistic accounts have almost wholly disappeared in course of time, 
having become obsolete, probably on account of the Sanskritization of those 
works in the form of the present Purana Therefore, the present Puranas, 
although they happen to he in modern garb, preserve the theistic tradition, the 
Vedic or old linguistic sources of which are for some reason or other not 
available to us at present. But the narratives contained in these Puranas belong 
to a period that is also anterior to the period of the compilation of the Rik 
Samhita by an immense interval of time Among the Sutra works we are 



fortunate in possessing a few that are theistic, viz. those made by Sandilya, 
Bharadwaja and several other Rishis. The Bhikshu Sutra and Karmandi 
Parasariya Sutra were written long before the V^asa Sutra. The bhakti sutras 
became current at the time of the composition of the present sattvata 
Pancharatra works. The sattvata sutras are composed in a way that is different 
from that of the rajasika and tamasika Tantras. The lines of thought designated 
as Bhagavata, Vaishnava, Naishkarma, Baikhanasa, Pancharatrika, etc., were 
prevalent in the pre-Vedic period. Thereafter, when the theistic thought suffered 
a partial eclipse by the preponderance of philosophical schools that were 
addicted to materialistic methods, the old theistic tradition was revived in the 
form of the present Puranas. 

The atheistic rationalism which subsequently culminated in historical Buddhism, 
was already in existence as early as the period of the Nrisingha and Vamana 
Avataras. Henotheism and pantheism of the Vedic and cognate schools present 
the poly-theistic or positive aspect of this line of thought which is negatively 
represented by historical Buddhism and Jainism and later in a marked form, by 
Sankara who recognized and clearly brought out the philosophical affinity 
between the two branches of the same line of thought and thus re-established 
friendly relationship between the two groups 

This atheistical pseudo-rationalism in its palmy days also coincided with the 
period of the triumphs of the Indian intellect in the different fields of 
empiric knowledge. This would not appear to be very- wonderful if we consider 
the present state of affairs in Europe. The Protestant movement degenerated 
into commercialism and the almost exclusive pursuit of material well-being 
which has given its secular tone to present western society. Great material 
prosperity is not a necessary indication of progress in spiritual science. Devotion 
to material facilities may be rewarded by success which, if it be not controlled 
by a clear spiritual purpose, may be of the nature of a nemesis to confirm 
the successful person and community in their unspiritual course The salutary 
aim should be not merely to juxtapose the two but to subordinate the material 
to the spiritual. This has never yet been practically possible in the world. 

Indian thought may be the subject of study in both its theistic and atheistic 
aspects under which latter is included, unfortunately, its secular systems. 

Those who lament that the absence of material prosperity of India today is due to 
its exclusive spiritual pre-occupation, may do well to take note of this. The 
theistic thought proper cannot be subordinate to the aim of material 



improvement. The two do not equate at all, being on different planes. A 
community that adopts the theistic course will be purified in its morals, 
improved in unity, and direct all its energies to those activities that are conducive 
to spiritual progress. It will be contented and orderly in all its parts in as much as 
it will have a common objective which is situated outside the limits of all 
clashing, temporary interests. There should be no limited, conflicting interests in 
a community regulated by the higher principle. Such a society will possess all 
the requisites of spiritual well-being which will prevent it from being disturbed 
by the operation of any unbridled disruptive ambitions of its constituent units. 
The nature of the ideal of one universal community will become clearer as 
the spiritual position itself clarifies in course of this narrative. It is, 
however, necessary to guard against possible misconception at the outset in view 
of current and deep-seated prejudices against religion for purely worldly reasons. 

The political greatness of Magadha belongs to the Age of the progress of Indian 
empiric knowledge. The Puranas lament the final corruption of politics in 
the hands of the ‘upstart’ kings of Magadha who favoured the 
indiscriminate subordination of the spiritual to the secular authority in defiance 
of the methods of the theistic periods. Under the kings of the dynasties of 
Magadha Buddhism became the official and the predominant religion of India. 
But India progressed materially. Secular progress also characterized Indian 
society under the Gupta Emperors who belonged officially to the henotheistic 
cult of panchopasana or the worship of five principal gods, viz., Sakti, the 
Sun, Ganapati, Siva and Vishnu. 

This worship of five gods ( panchopasana) is the religion of the large majority of 
the ‘Hindus’ of the present day and requires a few words of comment as 
regards its origin and character and its place in the general scheme of 
religious evolution. 

This worship by the fivefold orthodox Hindu community, corresponding to the 
five gods, viz., the Saktas, Sauras, Ganapatyas, Saivas, and 
henotheistic (panchopasaka) Vaishnavas, has prevailed in India from the 
remotest antiquity. 

The tendencies of the human mind are of two kinds, viz., (1) those that are 
directed towards material objects, and (2) those that are turned towards 
the highest good. From the first of these issue such activities as those 
undertaken for the nourishment of the body, the building of a home, marriage, 



production of offspring, the pursuit of different secular studies, the earning of 
wealth, physical sciences, arts, government and the accumulation of merit by 
good deeds, etc., etc. Many of these worldly activities of men are identical with 
those of the lower animals; but the purposive utilitarian efforts of man are 
superior to similar instinctive endeavours of the lower animals. But men, even 
although they may carry on all efforts and acts conducive to worldly advantage, 
are considered to be only two-legged animals unless they make an attempt to 
place themselves under the guidance of their spiritual nature. The function of 
the pure soul is the natural religion of all animate beings. In the natural state 
the function that is proper to the soul is fully manifest. In the bound state 
this natural function, or religion, is reduced to the form of ‘quest’ after the 
highest good. The worldly activities already mentioned attain their fulfillment 
only if they are performed in subordination to the spiritual purpose; otherwise 
they fail to establish the highest position of man. Therefore, the first appearance 
of the effort for the highest good, differentiating itself from the exclusive 
pursuit of worldly interests, may be termed as a slight turning toward Godhead. 
From this stage to the highest spiritual state there is all infinity of gradations. 

The Sakta religion is the name of the search of Godhead in the material world. In 
this religion material Nature is observed to be recognized as the 
supreme Regulatrix of the world. The customs and practices that are enjoined in 
the Sakta religion (dharma) are suitable for the stage of slight Godwardness. 

In reward to worldly people who have not yet begun to inquire after the 
highest good the customs recommended by the Sakta dharma may prove 
attractive and help to bring them over to the principle of the summum bonum. 

The religion that worships material energy is, indeed, the first spiritual effort of 
the bound soul and is extremely beneficial for people situated at that stage. 

When the Godward tendency has acquired strength, in the second stage of 
advance, the superiority and efficacy of heat among material objects 
being noticed, the Sun as the source of all heat is accepted as the object of 
worship. This leads to the origin of the Saura cult. Subsequently, when even heat 
also comes to be regarded as material and lifeless, the principle of animation 
is recognized as superior to it and gives rise to the worship of Ganapati, 
who represents the principle of animality. This is the third stage. In the fourth 
stage, the pure human consciousness comes to be worshipped as Siva and gives 
rise to the Saiva creed. In the fifth stage appears the Vaishnava religion or the 
worship of the Supreme Soul as different from the fractional soul of the 
individual. 



The religion that seeks the highest good is naturally divided into the above five 
grades. Therefore, in all countries these five religions have been prevalent in 
the different periods under different names. If we consider all the different 
religions that are current in this and other countries they can be put under one or 
other of the above classes. The Christian and Muhammedan bear a strong 
affinity to the Vaishnava religion of the henotheistic (panchopasaka) school. 
Buddhism and Jainism are similar to the Saiva cult. This is the scientific 
explanation of the differences between the different religions. Those who regard 
their own particular religion as the only true religion and stigmatize other 
religions as irreligion or pseudo-religion, are disabled by such prejudices from 
ascertaining the real Truth. As a matter of fact, having regard to the different 
stages, the respective religions should be considered as really different. But the 
religion that is natural to the soul is only one. In the graded condition of 
humanity it is not the duty of those who look to the essence of the matter to 
ignore this inevitable gradation of religion. In undertaking this discussion of the 
natural religion of the proper self of all animate beings we have no desire 
of withholding regard that is due to the respective grades of the different 
religions, in their natural and scientific order of precedence. 

The eternal (sattvata) theistic function (Vaishnava dharma) is the only religion 
(dharma) that is proper to the soul; or, in other words, it is the eternal religion of 
all animation. But the Vaishnava religion that is found to exist in the community 
which professes illusionism (mayavada) is only a caricature of the religion of the 
pure soul. The so-called Vaishnava religion of the henotheistic (panchopasaka) 
school when it becomes free from mundane references, that is to say, from 
illusionism (mayavada), thereby attains to the nature of the eternal function 
(sattvata dharma). The distinction due to Dualism, Dualistic-Dualistic-non- 
Dualism, Absolute Monism and Distinctive Monism, professed respectively by 
the four theistic schools of the pure Vaishnavas, are merely indicative of 
the diversified character of the Vaishnava thought itself. This difference of 
school (sampradaya) is not due to any real difference of principle, Mayavada is 
the one creed which is really opposed to the principle of devotion. 

Those Vaishnavas who profess Mayavada are not theistic Vaishnavas at all. 

The religious systems educed out of the perception of physical Nature, always 
fortified themselves by reference to old precedents and the Veda or the 
revealed Word. The philosophical systems which assumed their regular form in 
the sutra period, elaborated in the commentaries, furnished them with ready¬ 
made arguments, justifying their particular methods of worship and doctrine. 



All these were interconnected by their unity of outlook which was mundane 
and with the fruitive works and the gods and goddesses of the 
karmakandiya portions of the Veda and of the Tantras that were not spiritual. 
This is the tangled web of the current religious (?) life of India. It possesses an 
external appearance of being based upon the general body of the Scriptures of 
this country although showing a variety of faces that are by no means 
easily reconcilable with one another. Any systematic friendly treatment of 
current Hinduism is the despair alike of historians and philosophers. But in spite 
of their absurdities, their materialism which is often frankly explicit and 
their want of internal homogeneity, they have always impressed both outside 
and inside critics as presenting only the exterior or the covering matter that 
hides the sterling truth lying buried underneath. There are real grounds for 
such suspicion. 

We have dealt elsewhere with the non-theistical philosophical systems which 
arose during the sutra period or the beginning of the rationalistic Age and 
also with the Buddhistic and Jain systems. The philosophy of theism was 
collated in the Brahmana sutra, known also as the Vedanta sutra. The Brahmana 
sutra produced its commentators through the agencies of both the theistic and 
non-theistic schools. The most famous, and one of the earliest extant, 
commentary belonging to the latter class, is that of Sankaracharya in which he 
expounds the Vedanta sutra with wonderful dialectic skill to prove the exclusive 
monistic view. Armed with this, Sankara, by appealing to the Authority of 
revealed theism, succeeded in patching up an apparent reconciliation among all 
the warring non theistic creeds by throwing over them the deceptive coating 
of Illusionism and winning over even the followers of Buddhism, who had 
till then been openly hostile to the Vedic tradition, within its roomy fold. 
Although the other rival philosophical systems were not altogether driven out of 
the field and even continued to inspire the various non-theistic creeds, the 
superior logic of the system of Sankara secured more or less the approval of all 
non-theistic cults, especially as it tolerated and supported the practices of all of 
them, differing apparently only in regard to their methods in pursuance of 
the common end to be attained by those methods. 

The effective and uncompromising opponent of Sankara was the Vishnuvite 
thought itself which could not be stamped out by Sankara. The commentaries of 
Sankara were refuted by Sree Ramanuja and Madhvacharya who re-stated 
the theistic position by carefully exposing the errors of Sankara and laying bare 
his real object, which was different from his profession. Under the guise of 



loyalty to the revealed Word (sruti) Sankara proved even a greater enemy, on 
account of his profession of loyalty, of the theistic thought which was the 
real philosophy of the revealed Word, than even its open foes. 

The Vishnuvite thought had been vigorously reinforced by the compilation of the 
two great epics, viz., the Mahabharata a and the Ramayana which in 
their present forms contain a good deal of interpolated matter. The process 
which was in progress, of rewriting in the new Sanskrit language the contents of 
the older original books, furnished the opportunity, which was not missed by 
the opponents of the theistic thought, of consciously, or unconsciously 
importing into the Vishnuvite Narrative of the Epics a good deal of the thoughts 
and ideas of the other creeds. The Mahabharata was at once recognized by the 
Vishnuvite teacher as the text-book of their religion. The significance of the 
Teachings and Activities of Sree Krishna was, however, most fully and clearly 
brought out in Sreemad Bhagavat Purana which devoted itself exclusively to the 
task of finally separating the grain from the chaff and presenting the history of 
theism in its unadulterated and highest form of perfection embodied in the 
Teachings and Activities of Sree Krishna. Sreemad Bhagavatam is the gathering 
up and the final and complete statement of the theistic position successively 
revealed in course of the Ages. 

There is a class of thinkers, who without belonging to the school of successively 
heard transcendental sound, affect to value a religion in proportion to the 
antiquity of its origin. Revelation, according to such people, even if it were 
admitted as a true fact, by way of argument, could have taken place only in very 
remote times or at the very beginning of creation, and is, therefore, necessarily 
enshrined in the oldest (?) of all the extant Scripture, viz, the Rik Samhita. On 
this ground they are not disposed to regard as belonging to the class of revealed 
Scriptures any works that in their estimation appear to belong to an Age later 
than the Vedic. This view is directly opposed to such statements as that the Rik 
Veda itself is outside ‘Brahma Vidya ’ or ‘para Vidya the knowledge of the 
Absolute. We have tried to explain the significance of such and similar 
statements that refuse to let the Brahman as transcendental Sound to be labeled, 
catalogued and finally closed in the manner that the physical scientist would like 
to do according to his limited notions that refer exclusively to the finite objects 
of this world. The ‘Word of God 5 is not anything that is capable of being limited 
by space and time. That is also the reason why we are told that it is not possible 
for us to have any idea of Him except by the process of revelation. That which is 
unrelated to this world cannot be known by any kind of mundane reference, 



gross or subtle, physical or mental. Such prejudices, which the impartial voice of 
logic emphatically condemns, should be completely eradicated if we really want 
to acquire the spiritual perspective proper. 

The Puranas, in their spiritual significance, are eternal. They are accordingly 
spoken of as appearing and disappearing, in accordance with the strict logic 
of unadulterated theism. The Age or country or person to which they choose 
to appear, does not in the least affect their eternal character. They are neither 
old nor new but eternal, i.e., situated beyond the scope of past, present and 
future. Unless this is remembered no one need pretend that he really 
accepts, tentatively or even for the sake of argument, the logical implications of 
theism. The esoteric side which alone is present to the view of limited minds 
represents the misleading view of the Absolute. This esoteric vision requires to 
be temporarily discarded in order to be able to loyally follow a theistic 
narrative that is derived from unimpeachable sources and for that reason alone 
entitled to such hearing from every one of us, for our own benefit. 

In the light of the above observations it is possible to understand the meaning of 
those passages of the Scriptures that try to define the position of 
Sreemad Bhagavatam It is the only uncontaminated source of the revealed 
religion in its purity and completeness, available to us. Sreemad Bhagavatam is 
the explanation of the Brahma sutra; it settles the significance of the 
Mahabharata; it is of the nature of the commentary of the formula for delivering 
from worldliness (gayatri), the transcendental Sound Who is, as it were, the 
germ of all knowledge regarding the Absolute; and is the fulfillment of all 
the statements of the Vedas. The substance of all the philosophy of the Vedas 
is called Sreemad Bhagavatam. Suka churned the butter from the curd of the 
four Vedas and Parikshit ate of the same. After Sree Krishna returned to His 
own Abode the Sun in the shape of this Purana has arisen of late for 
the enlightenment of the blinded souls of this Age of discord’ The position of 
the Sreemad Bhagavatam as being the premier among the sattvata Puranas 
is attested by various passages in the different Puranas. 

The historian who maybe obsessed by his partiality for antiquity, being so 
wedded to the cult of time and space as to be unable to live in the 
pure atmosphere that is free from those dark vapours of this mundane world, 
should do well to take the help of those philosophers who possess a longer vision 
than his and who may warn him against riding an old error too hard as it is 
bound to expire in the process, if, indeed, it be his purpose to preserve it for 



the particular benefit of nobody. 


This is so as regards the so-called historical position of Sreemad Bhagavatam. 
The nature of the actual contents of this unique work cannot be indicated in 
a few words. By the side of the revealed Word the Avataras of Vishnu constitute 
a Source of transcendental knowledge forming the truly historical 
manifestation of the Word of God. The Word of Godhead tells us about 
Godhead, His Activities, Qualities, Abode and Servitors. The Avataras are the 
descent of these into this world in a shape that is visible to all of us in the forms 
of apparent mundane occurrences, by reason of the mundane nature of our 
present vision. The revealed Word is explained and corroborated by the narrative 
of the deeds of the Avataras. If the gayatri is comparable to the first appearance 
of the bud, Sreemad Bhagavatam is like the full-blown flower, being the inspired 
narrative of the successive Avataras of Vishnu, culminating in the advent of Sree 
Krishna Himself, into this world. 

Sree Krishna Chaitanya’s career and teaching offers the illustration of the 
Vaishnava religion in its highest development. The sankirtana of 
Krishna propounded by Sree Chaitanya is the highest form of worship of this 
religion, being equivalent to the loving service of Sree Krishna, as practiced by 
the milkmaids of Braja, the form itself being the method as well as the object of 
this transcendental worship. The nature of these will be explained in course of 
the narrative. 

But we would avail of this opportunity to ask the reader not to accept the current 
practices of the pseudo-followers of Sree Chaitanya in Bengal and elsewhere as 
the religion taught by Sree Chaitanya. We would also request him to forget what 
is offered in the pages of certain modern writers as the so-called history of the 
movement. Both are concoctions of the imaginations of people who are 
themselves utterly ignorant of the transcendental nature of the spiritual function. 
Such travesty of the Truth as is offered by the pseudo-Vaishnavas and empiric 
writers, is the necessary consequence of attempting to practice and explain the 
religion by worldly people, in as much as its nature cannot be understood by the 
limited intelligence of persons leading a worldly life who may give themselves 
out to be the followers of Sree Chaitanya or who may be betrayed by their self- 
sufficiency born of utter ignorance to undertake to write its history. We may 
quote again the dictum of Sree Chaitanya, which is so apposite in this 
connection, viz. ‘no one is fit to teach the religion who does not practice it 
himself.’ 



The psilanthropic (prakrita sahajia) cult passing under the name of 
Vaishnavism, is allied to the practices of those who follow the teaching of 
the tamasika Tantras. This class of Tantras, which had their zealous followers in 
the tracts of Chittagong (ChattogRama), led in those parts to the practice 
of revolting sexual excesses in the name of religion, and from there the 
contagion was carried to different parts of the country which also had their own 
tamasika Tantrikas by whom they were welcomed. This feature of decadent 
Buddhism is quite well known. The natural transcendental function (aprakrita 
sahaja dharma) that finds expression in the genuine poems of Chandidas 
and Vidyapati, which were approved by Sree Chaitanya, belongs to the category 
of unalloyed devotion to Godhead. But those songs that now pass under 
the names of Vidyapati and Chandidas have suffered interpolation and alteration 
in the hands of the sensualists of former and present generations. The 
sensual feature is altogether absent from the practices recommended by Sree 
Chaitanya both by His own conduct as well as by His teachings. But many 
pseudo-sects that profess at the present day to be the followers of Sree Chaitanya 
try to pass off the sensual cult as the religion of pure love for Godhead taught by 
Sree Chaitanyadeva. The congregational chanting (sankirtana) as performed by 
these pseudo-Vaishnavas is nothing but a musical dissipation that falls in with 
their other taste for unbridled sexuality. It will appear in its due place in 
this narrative that the congregational chanting (sankirtana) propounded by 
Sree Krishna-Chaitanya is something that is altogether different, both as regards 
its method and object, from what now ordinarily passes under its name. In 
the concluding chapter of this work we will return to the details of the history 
and shall try to supply the reader with the real account of the development 
of pseudo-sankirtana among the sensualists. The process of misrepresenting 
the pure Vishnuvite religion by pseudo-followers and opponents in the 
various forms of pseudo-Vaishnavism and non-Vaishnavism, which operated 
with such signal consequences in the past, have not been less active during the 
four centuries that have elapsed since the disappearance of Sree Chaitanya, 
to obscure and misrepresent the religion of pure love for Godhead, taught 
and practiced by Him. 

The history of India, written too exclusively by ethnologist and archaeologists, 
has left out of account the factor that really matters, viz., the substance of 
its spiritual culture which possesses a continuous and recoverable history. 

Much work for the elucidation of the religious history of India has been done 
by foreign empiric scholars whose judgment cannot, however, be relied upon 
in essential matters which are doubly opposed to their experience and local 



mode of life. The ‘Orion’ of Balgangadhar Tilak made a nearer approach to the 
true method. But Tilak was swept off his legs by his association with 
physical efforts, to the detriment of his intellectual and theological speculations. 
Those who are sincerely anxious to work in the field of spiritual culture must 
first of all get rid of all lesser considerations than the Absolute Truth, both in 
their intellectual and worldly lives, as ‘he alone is fit to be a teacher of the 
religion who also practices the same’. 

The History of India of the pre-Christian period is still enveloped in the darkness 
of obscurity. But from the mediaeval period we are on firmer ground. There is no 
lack of materials from firsthand informants in writing the life of Sree Chaitanya. 

I shall conclude this chapter with a few words of observation on the system of 
caste. Sree Chaitanya is wrongly supposed to have been an opponent of 
the caste-system. As a matter of fact Sree Chaitanya kept strictly aloof from 
secular society and politics. He never encouraged social rupture in any form. 
Spiritual society, according to Sree Chaitanya, is only camp-life. Theists alone 
are in a position to live such a life. Sree Chaitanya called into Himself 
particular individuals from all ranks of the then existing society. He formed the 
spiritual association of such individuals. His householder-followers did not bring 
over the members of their households, nor their relatives, into the religion. It is 
not a hereditary community that can be formed on the spiritual basis. It was 
also, therefore, a proselytizing religion in its external appearance. Several of 
its leading Acharyas came from the lowest ranks of the orthodox society or 
even from outside. Thakur Haridas was a Muhammedan by birth. 

The subject of ‘varna’ hinges on the answer to the question “Who is 
Brahmana ?” There are numerous passages in the Scripture which contain a clear 
answer to the question. There is a long discussion on this point in 
the Vajrasuchikopanishad which, after rejecting for different reasons answers 
that identify the Brahmana with (1) the individual soul himself, the physical 
body, (3) the species, (4) the cognitive principle, (5) the principle of activity, 
arrives at the conclusion that the Brahmana is the possessor of certain qualities. 
‘He knows the real nature of the self and by reason of such knowledge 
remains always free from any defects due to greed, anger, etc., is possessed 
of equanimity and self-control, is uninfluenced by caprices, malice, thirst, 
desire or infatuation, with mind unaffected by arrogance, egotism, etc. This is 
the purpose of the Sruti, Smriti, Itihasa and the Puranas. No other view 
of Brahmanaism tenable, In the Chanddogya Upanishad we have the 



following, “Gautama said,, ‘Fairlooking one, to which lineage (gotra) do you 
belong? 5 ” He answered, “I do not know to which gotra I belong. I asked my- 
mother. she said to me, ‘In my youth in course of ministering to many persons, 
as their servant, I begot you as my son. I do not really know to which gotra you 
belong. My name is Jabala. Your name is Satyakama. 5 1 am thus Satyakama 
Jabala. 55 To this Gautama replied, ‘Child, the truth which you have spoken 
cannot be given out by any one who is not a Brahmana . Therefore, are you 
Brahmana. I accept you, good-looking one; collect the requisites for the 
performance of the formal rites of the occasion. I will admit you as pupil for the 
study of the Scriptures. (I will invest you with the sacrificial thread of a 
Brahmana.) Do not fall away from the truth. 5 This attitude of Gautama is thus 
described in the Saman Samhita, ‘In a Brahmana straightforward sincerity and in 
a Sudra crookedness respectively, are to be found. Haridrumata Gautama by 
considering this difference of quality bestowed on Satyakama the right of the 
Brahmana to study the Scriptures (upanayana), or purification by the gayatri.’ “ 
‘We do not know whether we are Brahmanas or non-Brahmana s, 5 this doubt 
arose in the minds of the truth-loving Rishis 55 (text of the Sruti quoted by 
Nilakantha). In the Geeta Sree Krishna says, “I have created the four varnas in 
accordance with difference in the qualities and works of different persons. 
Although I am the Lord, know Me as not the Creator of those institutions. 55 That 
is to say, the institutions of ‘varnd and ‘ashramd are created by the deluding 
energy of Godhead Who in His proper Nature is indifferent to them. In the 
Puranas and Mahabharata there are long lists of persons who acquired the status 
of Brahmana s although they were not born in Brahmana families. The principle 
Underlying the institution is stated most clearly in a shloka of the. Mahabharata 
(Anusasana parva, 143—50, 51) which may be rendered thus, ‘Birth, 
purificatory ceremony, the study of the Vedas or descent,—none of these is the 
cause of the status of the twiceborn; one's disposition is the only cause. If a 
Sudra is found to possess the proper disposition, he attains to the condition of 
the Brahmana ., This britta-Brahmanata, or Brahmana hood by disposition, is 
the real principle underlying the division into varnas, and is attested by 
numerous passages that are to be found in all the Scriptures. While there is not a 
single passage which declares that Brahmana hood is due to birth alone, there 
are other passages which declare the inevitable loss of the status of a Brahmana 
and lapse into that of a Sudra with deterioration of disposition. 

In the case of the Brahmana there are three births. The first of these is the 
seminal birth on coming out of the womb of the mother. After the 
upanayana (bringing of the boy to the preceptor, i.e, entrance into pupilage for 



Vedic studies) the second birth takes place; and, thereafter, on the attainment 
of initiation into the sacrifice, the third birth occurs (Manu, 2/260). Thus there 
are three kinds of birth, viz., (1) seminal (shaukra), (2) through gayatri 
(savitrya), and (3) through initiation (daikshya). This is expressed by the word 
tribrit which means these three kinds of birth. If a person, born in a Brahmana 
family, remaining ignorant of the Veda, or the Truth regarding the Divinity, 
manifest extreme arrogance on the strength of his possession of the sacrificial 
thread, by right of seminal birth, for such sin that Brahmana is designated by the 
name of ‘animal’ (pashu) (Atri Sarnhita, shloka 372). According to Manu, 2/168, 
the twice-born who, without devoting himself to the study of the Vedas, 
applies himself to other matters, becomes thereby a Sudra even during his 
lifetime with his whole family. The Padma Purana defines the term Brahmana 
bruva (pseudo -Brahmana). "The Brahmana who after undergoing purification 
(?) by the tenfold samskara does not perform either the eternal (nitya) or 
adventitious (naiimittika) functions, is called a ‘Brahmana-bruva\ That twice- 
born person who having undergone niyama, brata and all the samskaras does not 
yet perform any of the duties enjoined by the Vedas, is a Brahmana -bruva 
(pseudo -Brahmana ). If a person, who has obtained purification (samskara) and 
the sacrificial thread, neglects the regular performance of duties that are 
enjoined and does not study the Vedas, he is to be considered a Brahmana-bruva 
(pseudo -Brahmana). He who does not himself study the highest Veda-shastras 
nor teaches them to disciples, although such a person may happen to possess 
the tenfold samskara (purification), is nevertheless a Brahmana bruva (pseudo- 
Brahmana ).” This is confirmed by Kulluka Bhatta in his remarks on Manu, 785, 
“the person born of a Brahmana family who, although devoid of 
the performance of the duties proper for a Brahmana , passes himself off as 
a Brahmana, is designated by the term ‘Brahmana-bruvd (pseudo-Brahmana 
),” etc., etc. 

The position is thus summed up in a shloka of the Sreemad Bhagavatam (7- 
1135), ‘by- those signs that have been enumerated, which indicate the respective 
varnas of men, the varna of a person is to be settled.' This is corroborated 
by Mahabharata, Sand parva, 189-8. The varna institution as found in 
the Scriptures is an individualistic classification of man according to 
disposition. The necessity for such institution is thus stated, ‘Divine Vishnu is 
worshipped by a person who practices the functions ( dharma ) enjoined by the 
institutions of varna and asrama. There is no other way of pleasing Him than by 
such activities as are enjoined by the institutions of varna and asrama. In the 
Satya Yuga there was only one varna. The division into four varnas was made in 



the Treta Age. In the Kali Age cannibals (rakshasas) are born in the 
Brahmana families for troubling those whose tenfold purification (samskara), 
pursuit of Vedic studies, etc., have lost their vitality.’ Accordingly ‘as in the Kali 
Age Brahmana s by seminal birth do not possess any purity and are like the 
Sudras they are not purified by following the Vedic path. They are purified by 
the pancharatric method alone’. ‘Because just as by some particular 
chemical process the bell-metal is transformed into gold in the same way by the 
sattvata Tantric diksha (elaborated spiritual initiation) every one is enabled to 
acquire the nature of a Bipra .’ The words of Digdarsini, quoted by Sree 
Sanatana Goswami, declare that the status of a twice-born belongs to all men 
after initiation. 

Initiation (diksha) is of two kinds, viz., (1) Vedic, and (2) in conformity with the 
Vedas. Of these the second is again of two kinds, viz., (1) Pauranic, or 
(2) Pancharatric. The difference between them consists in this that the 
Vedic diksha is the initiation of the duly purified twice-born considered as a 
fit person for receiving spiritual enlightenment. The Pauranic diksha is 
initiation of an unfit person on the assumption of fitness. The Pancharatric 
diksha is the initiation of an unfit person with the object of ensuring his fitness. 
Of these the Vedic initiation is ruled out as inadmissible in the Kali Age. Sree 
Haribhaktivilas gives the preference to the Pancharatric (tantric) diksha over 
the Pauranic. The diksha of Sudras formulated by the smtartas, who belong to 
the creed of the panchoasakas and who favour exclusively the principle of 
seminal descent, is not entitled to be called diksha in any sense. At the time of 
Sree Chaitanya the Pancharatric diksha alone was in use as the Panchopasaka 
(i.e , atheistic) smartas had not been able to obtain such a great influence over 
society by that period as they have now. The subsequent disuse of the 
Pancharatric diksha by the so-called Vaishnava Acharyas of a later day who 
were under the thumb of the smartas, will be described in due course. 

Diksha is so called by savants well versed in the knowledge of the Divinity 
because it confers the spiritual knowledge (i.e., the knowledge of 
one’s relationship with Godhead) and destroys sinfulness with its root-cause.’ 
The upanayana corresponds to matriculation or admission into the path of the 
true knowedge. the diksha corresponds to graduation, i.e., the actual attainment 
of the enlightened state, or, according to the Pancharatric method, its 
actual attainment in the future if the conditions enjoined by the process are 
fulfilled. One becomes a Brahmana on the attainment of such knowledge. It is 
this spiritual status that is referred to in such passages as in Brihad., 3-9-10, 



‘Gargi, he who having known the Divine Truth thereafter leaves this world is 
alone a Brahmana/ and Brihad., 4-4-21, ‘the intelligent Brahmana having learnt 
about the Brahman from the Scriptures will endeavour to cultivate love for 
Him,. Thereupon he is called Vaishnava, as being related to Vishnu. The 
Vaishnava is thus higher than all the varnas. The condition of the Brahmana is 
included in and surpassed by that of the Vaishnava. 

Britta-Brahmana ta (the status of the Brahmana by disposition) is the condition 
precedent to the attainment of the higher status of the Vaishnava or servant 
of Vishnu, in accordance with the teaching of the Scriptures. The status of 
a Brahmana resting on seminal birth alone is nowhere mentioned in 
the Scriptures. One of the very first steps that is required for the re-establishment 
of the spiritual (daiva) varnasrama institution is to make britta-Brahmana ta 
the legal institution in order to ensure its practical recognition as the 
genuine Scriptural institution by all communities and the re-establishment of 
this proper gradation in the Vaishnava communities (sampradayas). The form 
of britta-Brahmana ta is prevalent in the Ramanandi community. It is the basis 
of the arrangement laid down in the Satkriyasaradipika. 

The Brahmo movement, which at one time applied itself to the reform of religion 
in Bengal, has now become almost a purely social movement and has cut itself 
completely away from the revealed Scriptures. Its founder Raja Rammohan Roy 
became latterly inclined towards mundane facilities. It is such worldly 
considerations that also lie at the root of the subsequent split in the Brahmo 
community. The intellectual vigour which at one time distinguished the 
community has practically left it and gone over to the Theosophists who 
are careful not to commit themselves in spiritual matters to anything definite. 

The position of the Theosophists is the intellectual counterpart of the social ideal 
of the Brahmos to which the latter attach supreme importance. The Brahmos 
want to do away with caste, as it stands in the way of mundane facilities. 

But organized society is in every sense better than indiscriminate individualism. 

The Brahmo program offers only the individualistic in place of the communal. 
All mundane systems have their special defects. No real progress towards 
the spiritual state is possible by the adoption of such a course. What is needed 
is not to ignore the spiritual, and substitute in its place the material and 
worldly, but to acknowledge the spiritual and try sincerely to follow its lead in 
arranging our temporary affairs of this world. 



The one method of attaining to the spiritual is by listening to the history of 
Godhead Who frequently comes down into this world in order, by His 
activities made visible to this world, to afford the bound jivas the opportunity of 
having the transcendental in the very- midst of the mundane. Such history 
is necessarily unintelligible to the bound jiva and, therefore, it has to be 
listened to from the lips of sadhus who can alone understand and properly 
expound it. By listening constantly to the narrative of the transcendental 
pastimes of the Divinity recorded in the Scriptures from the lips of sadhus who 
themselves live the spiritual life bound jivas are enabled gradually to attain to 
the consciousness of their real spiritual nature. 

In the next chapter we intend accordingly to present the reader with a brief 
explanatory account of the Descents (Avataras) of Godhead. After one’s spiritual 
nature is freed from the delusions of this material world he is in a position to 
understand what the service of Godhead really means. The life of Sree Krishna 
Chaitanya Who is the living Embodiment of the very highest form of service, 
cannot be really intelligible to bound jivas unless they are prepared to undergo 
spiritual novitiate at the feet of real devotees in the manner prescribed by the 
Word of Godhead and exemplified in all its stages, from its first beginning to the 
highest development, in the life of Sree Krishna Chaitanya. This is the truth of 
the life of Sree Chaitanya. It is indispensable to the bound jiva to be properly 
acquainted with it if he is disposed to attain to and continue in the state of the 
pure service of Godhead. The one thing needful for us all is, therefore, to listen 
to the Divine history from the lips of sadhus, to chant the same and to act in 
strict conformity with its teaching after the manner taught by and exemplified in 
the life of Sree Krishna Chaitanya. 



9 History Of Divine Descents (Avataras) 

This term ‘Avatara, means ‘coming down’ of the Divinity, Whose Nature is 
purely spiritual, into this material world, retaining fully. His own transcendental 
Nature. Therefore, the English word ‘Incarnation,’ which means putting on of 
the material coil, is wholly inapplicable to the process. When Godhead actually 
chooses to come down into this world He appears to the view of bound jivas as 
an animate being possessed of a physical body not essentially different from that 
of other bound jivas. But Godhead although He appears to them to belong to this 
world, does not really belong to this world at all. The deluding Energy of 
Godhead, who is instrumental in the creation of this world of limitations as the 
dwelling-place of individual souls that are averse to Godhead and who stunts 
their vision, has no power over Godhead Himself. Godhead is the Lord of the 
deluding Energy who is different from His spiritual Power. The deluding Energy 
herself is subordinate to God’s own spiritual Power. The Form and everything 
pertaining to the personality of Godhead, belong eternally to the category of the 
spirit and are located above and beyond the jurisdiction of His illusory power. 
But in spite of the existence of eternal demarcation between Him and the realm 
of His deluding power, Godhead chooses to come down occasionally into the 
realm of physical Nature in the plenitude of His spiritual Power with all His 
eternal Paraphernalia and becomes actually visible to bound jivas in whose sight 
He seems to appear not as spirit, because the spiritual essence transcends their 
power of vision, but in the likeness of a mundane phenomenon. The eternal 
servitors of Godhead who also appear in this world in His company, may alone 
have the sight of Him and His Activities as They really are. These manifestations 
of the Absolute, as Absolute, in the domain of this relative existence, are 
designated by the term Avatara,. 

In the Geeta Sree Krishna says to Arjuna that He comes down repeatedly into 
this world and in this respect resembles the bound jiva who is caught in the cycle 
of physical birth and rebirth. But there is a very great difference between the two 
processes. Sree Krishna is the Lord of all, has no physical birth and as regards 
His proper Nature He is absolutely unchangeable. He appears in this world 
through the medium of His spiritual Power. But the jivas are born in this world 
being endowed with physical bodies for the purpose by the power of 
the deluding Energy (maya sakti) as the result of their active aversion to 
Godhead. The Appearance of Godhead in this world in various forms, such as 
those of gods, reptiles, etc., is brought about by His Own Will. When He chooses 



to come down into this world His pure spiritual Body does not become 
enveloped in a double encasement of matter in the gross and subtle forms as in 
the case of the bound jiva. Godhead is simply pleased to make manifest in this 
world His own eternal spiritual Body that exists eternally in the Absolute Realm 
of Vaikuntha. If this appears incomprehensible to the limited reason of the 
bound jiva it is so for the reason that the Power of the Divinity is inconceivable 
and above all controversy. Therefore, the real nature of the Activities of 
Godhead are not at all ascertainable by the reason of the jiva. What the jiva 
can understand, if he chooses not to be perversely inclined, is that Godhead, 

Who is possessed of inconceivable Power, never becomes subject to the laws 
of physical Nature. The deluding power by which the bound jiva is controlled 
is also Divine. But the Divine power that belongs to Godhead is 
nevertheless always spiritual and is categorically different from material Energy. 
The Power of Godhead is one. As spiritual Power alone She is eligible to 
directly serve Godhead. As material Energy She has no access to the presence of 
Her Lord. The material Energy is subordinate to the spiritual Power, as shadow 
is subordinate to substance or as darkness to light. It is the function of the 
nonsubstantial deluding material energy to provide souls that are averse 
to Godhead with a shadowy world for their deluded existence. 

The only law that governs the Descent (Avatara) of Godhead into this world is 
the Divine Will. Godhead appears in this world when He wills. He chooses to 
appear in this world whenever there is any unbearable decline of religion leading 
to the prevalence of irreligion. The laws that govern the course of this material 
world, as they proceed from the Will of Godhead, are irresistible. But in course 
of time when for some undefinable reason those laws suffer a change for the 
worse, due to defects bred by time, irreligion waxes strong. No one except 
Godhead Himself is able to set right those defects. 

Therefore, appearing in this world with His spiritual paraphernalia, the Supreme 
Lord puts down all such abnormal deterioration in religion. 

Godhead manifests Himself in a twofold way. The creation of the spiritual and 
non-spiritual worlds and the regulation of them by inviolable laws, is one of 
these. The Activities of Godhead, as distinct from His creations, in these created 
worlds, constitute the second kind of His manifestations. Individual souls (jivas) 
are associates of the activities of Godhead. The successive manifestations of 
Godhead that appear to the view of the jiva in the material world, correspond 
respectively to those states that he happens to be in as the result of his meddling 



with matter, such activity itself being due to his falling away from his own 
proper spiritual nature by the prevalence of his desire for selfish enjoyment. His 
Infinite Kindness towards the fallen soul, is the only cause of the manifestations 
of Godhead in this world. These manifestations are called Divine Descents 
(Avataras). From the stage that is anterior to the appearance of the spine in 
organisms to the appearance of the fully-developed man several great Rishis 
have recorded their observation of eight successive Descents of the Divinity, 
others have noticed eighteen, and a third group have observed twenty-four, 
Divine Avataras. The well-known view of the Ten Avataras is the one that is 
held by most Rishis who were versed in Divine science. Those Rishis postulate 
ten particular states through which the soul passes successively from the 
beginning to the end of each stage of his bondage. These are indicated by (1) 
absence of the spinal column, (2) appearance of the circular spine, (3) the 
elongated spine, (4) the vertical spine or the man-animal state, (5) the man of 
dwarfish stature, (6) man in the savage state, (7) civilized man, (8) intellectual 
man, (9) ultra-intellectual state, and (10) complete destruction of the unspiritual 
state. In accordance with these successively appearing historical states in the 
evolution of the bound state of the jiva, the ten Avataras, viz., Fish, Tortoise, 
Boar, Man-Lion, Dwarf, Parasu Rama, Rama, Balarama, Buddha and Kalki are 
observed as the corresponding Forms of the Divine Appearance. The narrative of 
Their Supernatural Activities is recorded in the Puranas and specially in 
Sreemad Bhagavatam. Those specialists of the science of devotion, who have 
understood the nature of these Divine manifestations by means of intensive 
concentrated investigation, have, by the grace of Sree Krishna Chaitanya, been 
enabled to realize the Truth regarding Krishna and specially the unique 
exquisiteness of His Braja-pastimes. ‘Of all the pastimes of Krishna His human 
activities are the highest and His proper nature and His proper Form is the 
Human.’ 

The Descent of Divine Spiritual Power into the realm of the material energy, or, 
in other words, the manifestation of Godhead’s own spiritual Power in 
the apparent form of the manifestation of material Energy, is known as 
Divine Descent (Avatara). By means of such Descent the association of the 
novice, on the path of spiritual life in this world, with the realm of the spirit, is 
effected and such association is the only way by which the person practicing 
spiritual endeavour (sadhaka) is enabled to attain spiritual realization. 

It will be observed that the account of the ten Avataras that correspond to the 
respective stages of the human mind in the course of the development of 



its spiritual consciousness, has been explained by means of terms that 
have recently been employed in the domain of physical science in connection 
with the evolution of the human physique from the first beginning of animal life 
in the amoebae. From this apparent analogy the modern reader may scent, in 
the explanation recorded in the Scriptures, an unacknowledged and 
crude misapplication, to an irrelevant subject, of the truly scientific theory of 
the evolution of the physical form of animal life. Or, if he is at all inclined 
to recognize the priority of the Scriptures, he may be also led by a 
foregone conclusion to suppose that the Myth of the, Avataras might be 
connected with those periods that correspond to the respective stages in the 
evolution of the animal form, and are of value as a piece of antiquarian curiosity 
as a vague anticipation of the modern theory, that might have served its purpose 
in the past. Or, again, the doctrine of the tenfold Descent may lead the reader 
to suppose that it refers in some way to the progress of material 
civilization culminating in the elimination of all unspiritual elements in an ideal 
future ensured by the progress of physical scientific knowledge. 

In reply to such speculations we refer to the principles that have already been 
discussed at some length, viz., that the Descents (Avataras) of Vishnu are neither 
physical phenomena nor have They any reference to the progress of material 
civilization. But although the spiritual is eternally and categorically different 
from the material it can be described to those who are totally unacquainted with 
its nature only by analogy with, and by means of terms that actually-refer 
exclusively to, the mundane. This analogy is however not wholly inapplicable 
only if it be clearly and constantly remembered as an analogy and not as the 
spiritual entity itself that is analogically described. The individual soul in the 
bound state has to pass through forms of deluded existence that correspond 
analogically to the physical bodies with which he is successively endowed for 
the purpose. Those forms themselves are, however, material, and signify a 
progressive development of the functions of the incipient principle of the 
adventitious life of the false-ego of the bound jiva There is a regular chain of 
physical and mental progress (?) on the mundane plane for the bound jiva. This 
progress, however, derives what deceptive appearance of reality it seems 
to possess, from its being really the perverted reflection of the Absolute. But in 
as much as it happens to be a deluding reflection of the Reality it reproduces in 
an unwholesome and distorted form the features of its corresponding 
spiritual condition, which latter is the subject-matter of the history of the ten 
.Avataras. Godhead exists in all the forms in the realm of the Absolute that are 
reproduced in the distorted material phenomena of this universe. In the region of 



the Absolute there really exist eternally all varieties of jivas; and Godhead 
Himself is there eternally manifest in all those Forms. The adventitious physical 
form of the jiva in this world is material and limited ; but the corresponding 
spiritual forms of the transcendental world, are eternal, unlimited, self-conscious 
and free from all defects. The varieties of the forms of this world owe their 
relative existence, being related as shadow to substance or as darkness to light, 
to the real entities of the transcendental plane. The ordinary fish of the 
transcendental plane is not merely superior to the Darwins of this world but His 
nature is realizable by a process that is only obscured by those very notions with 
which the physical form of the fish has been endowed by the mental speculations 
of the Darwinian science, however applicable these speculations may appear to 
us to be in respect of the evolution of the principle of life of this world. Man 
as fully evolved animal in the Darwinian sense, is too perverted a creature to 
be reclaimable by the Form of Vishnu as Fish and hence the necessity 
of progressively fuller manifestation of the Divinity for curing the evils of 
a progressively retrograding world. 

These Descents, or manifestations of the Divinity in this world, take place in all 
Ages in accordance with the spiritual aptitude of the particular forms of material 
animation to whom They choose to appear. India has been the chosen land where 
in all the Ages the Descents (Avataras) of the Divinity have taken place. Indians 
have been fitted by the Will of Godhead, by their spiritual varnasrama 
institution to deserve this special favour. 

Sree Krishna is the Own Self of the Absolute Reality, Godhead Himself. If 
Godhead simultaneously manifests Himself in many places and if 
those manifested Forms happen to be equal to their source in respect of 
their Qualities, Activities, etc., those Forms are designated as prakasha 
(manifest) murtis (Forms) of Godhead. There is usually no qualitative difference 
as between these manifest Forms and the Form That is their Source. As 
for example, on the occasion of His marriage Sree Krishna at one and the 
same time married, in qualitatively same but numerically different manifest 
forms, sixteen thousand consorts ; and, on the occasion of the Rasa-pastime, 

He appeared simultaneously in the company of every one of the gopees as 
His partner in the dance. On the Rasa Site of Braja the manifest Forms of the 
fullest Source-Form made their appearance and in the city of Dwaraka, on 
the occasion of His marriage with His Consorts, the Forms that 
manifested themselves were Those identical with the full Source-Form. No 
difference was observed to exist between those manifest Forms and the Source- 



Form. But we also hear of particular Forms of direct manifestation for special 
purposes and in those manifestations there are also observed differences as 
regards the Form. As for instance, in the Son of Devaki we find the four-armed 
Form. In this instance in spite of this difference in the Form the principle of 
direct manifestation is admitted. This also holds true in other similar instances. 
All these are Prakasa-Murtis of Sree Krishna or Godhead Himself. 

Next to the above are Tadekatmarupas. These are Divine Forms that are 
essentially identical with that of Godhead Himself. These may accordingly 
be called Forms that are included in the nucleus of the Divine Form but are 
slightly different as regards Their figures from Godhead’s Own Form. These 
constituent Forms are of two kinds according as They happen to be either (1) 
Forms for expanded Activity (bilasa), or (2) constituent fractional Forms 
(svangsa). Of These He Who possesses powers that are nearly equal to those of 
Godhead Himself, is called Form for extended Activity (bilasa), e.g., Sree 
Baladeva and Sree Vaikuntha-Narayana. He Whose powers are less than those 
of the form for extended Activity, is called the constituent fractional Form of the 
Divinity, e.g., the Forms of Fish, Tortoise, etc. 

Next comes the manifestation of Divine Descent in the form of inspiration. He is 
called Divinely inspired into whom any one of the powers of the Divinity 
is transfused. Such inspiration occurs only in the case of the highest 
individual souls (jivas) . Divine inspiration is of two kinds according as the 
inspiration proceeds from Godhead Himself or from the Power of Godhead. The 
individual soul (jiva) who is inspired by Godhead regards himself as the 
Divinity. He who is inspired by Divine Power considers himself as the servant of 
Godhead. Vyasadeva and Rishabhadeva, etc., are inspired Avataras. 

Next come those Avataras who are mainly of three kinds, viz., (1) Purushavatara, 
i.e, Descent of Godhead as Master, (2) Gunavatara, i.e., Descent of Godhead as 
the Manifestation of any Divine Quality, and (3) Leelavatara, i.e., Descent for 
the manifestation of Transcendental Activities. Of these the Avatara of Godhead 
in exercise of His Supremacy is of three kinds, viz., (1) the Person who watches 
and guides the inmost purpose of primordial physical Nature, creates the 
material principle itself and reposes in the liquid of the Causal Ocean without 
directly interfering in any phenomenal occurrences. Samkarsana and Maha- 
Vishnu are other Names of this first of the Purushavataras. He is a constituent 
Plenary Subjective Portion of Samkarsana Who is the second of the constituent 
enveloping Forms of Sree Narayana, Lord of Vaikuntha. (2) The second 



Purushavatara controls from within the aggregate universe in its subtle stage, is 
the Creator of Brahma and reposes in the spiritual liquid in the womb of physical 
Nature. He is subjective plenary Portion of Pradyumna, the third constituent 
enveloping Form of the Lord of Vaikuntha. (3) The third Purusha guides the 
material universe in its constituent parts, that is to say, is the Controller from 
inside of individual jivas, as the Supreme Soul and reposes in the Ocean of Milk. 
He is the Plenary Subjective Portion of Aniruddha, the fourth of the constituent 
enveloping Forms of Sree Narayana. 

There are three Gunavataras, viz., Vishnu, Brahma and Siva. The third of the 
purushas mentioned above is the same as Vishnu Who is the Maintainer of 
this world by exercise of the quality of cognitive manifestation ( sattva ). 

Brahma, sprung from the navel-lotus of Vishnu, is the creator by means of the 
active (rajas) quality and is only another aspect of Vishnu. In certain Kalpas 
(i.e., regime of Brahma) jivas, as the result of their previous performance of 
pious deeds that make them fit for such distinction, may hold the high office 
of Brahma, the creator. Brahma of this type, by reason of the fact that the 
Divine Power is infused into a jiva, is also called inspired Descent (Avatara). 
Such a Brahma should not be regarded as the equal of Vishnu. In those Kelps in 
which, due to the absence of jivas of requisite fitness, Vishnu Himself plays the 
role of Brahma, it is only then that Brahma should be viewed as the equal of 
Vishnu. This principle holds in the case of all the gods who exercise any 
authority over Nature, such as Indra, etc. They are sometimes jivas, possessed of 
special fitness, invested with the Divine power, and sometimes they are 
Vishnu Himself. From the lowest to the highest region of the universe the 
aggregate of all material objects forms the gross body of Brahma. This also is 
called Brahma. The second Purusha who guides the inner workings of this 
aggregate is their Lord or Isvara. Siva is the destroyer by means of the tamas 
(stupefying) quality. Brahma, who is sprung from the navel-lotus Vishnu, effects 
the destruction of the world by assuming the form of Siva. In certain Kalpas 
pious jivas also hold the office of Siva, the destroyer. In certain Kalpas again 
Vishnu Himself performs the act of destruction in the Form of Siva. These 
destroyers are all called Gunavataras. But He Who exists in the realm of Siva 
(Sivaloka) inside Vaikuntha as Sadasiva, is not Gunavatara. He is devoid of 
worldly qualities and, like Narayana, is a Manifestation, constituent Form, or 
Plenary Subjective Portion of Sree Krishna Himself. Sadasiva stands to Siva in 
the relation of the whole to the derivative portion, is higher than Brahma and is 
equal to Vishnu. He is differentiated from jiva by the fact that the latter is 
engrossed in worldly qualities. 



Next in order are the Leelavataras. These are twenty-five, viz., Chatuhsana, 
Narada, Varaha, Matsya, Yajna, Nara-Narayana, Kapila, Datta, 

Hayasirsha, Hamsa, Prisni-garbha, Rishabha, Prithu, Nrisingha, Kurma, 
Dhanwantari, Mohini, Vamana, Parasurama, Raghunatha, Vyasa, Balabhadra, 
Krishna, Buddha and Kalki. These appear in every successive Kalpa. 

The Manvantaravataras are all of them also Leelavataras but are so called as 
they rule over their respective manvantaras, i.e, intervals between 
the appearance of one Manu and his next successor. There are fourteen 
such Avataras, e.g., Yajna, Bibhu, Satyasena, Habi, Vaikuntha, Ajita, 

Vamana, Sarbabhauma, Rishabha, Bisvaksena, Dharmasetu, Sudama, 

Yogeswara, and Brihadbhanu. 

The Manvantaravatara becomes the Yugavatara in a particular Yuga (constituent 
Age) of his Manvantara for the promulgation of particular forms of 
worship. There are four Yugavataras corresponding to the four Yugas. The 
Avatara of Satya Yuga is white, of Treta red, of Dvapara green, and of Kali 
usually, dark colour. In the Kali Yuga there is also mentioned, rarely, a yellow 
Yugavatara. Of these Yugavataras some are inspired, some are prabhava 
(master), some baibhava (expansion) and some parabastha. Among these He 
Who possesses the full power of the Divinity is parabastha. In baibhava the 
power is less than in parabastha and in prabhava the power is less than in 
baibhava. In abesha or inspired ,Avatara there is manifestation of only a single 
potency. Chatuhsana, Narada and Prithu, etc., are inspired Avataras. Matsya 
(Fish), Kurma (Tortoise), Narayana, Varaha (Boar), Hayasirsha (Horse-headed), 
Prisnigarbha, Balabhadra, Yajna, etc., are baibhava, and Nrisingha (Man-Lion), 
Ramachandra and Sree Krishna are parabastha, in the inverse order of 
superiority. Of These again Sree Krishna is Godhead Himself. There is no one 
greater than He. Sree Krishna has four Abodes, viz., Braja, Madhupur, Dwaraka 
and Goloka, each superior to the next in the order of enumeration. Sree Krishna 
is Fullest, sporting in Braja with His own and with Baladeva. The same Krishna 
is Fuller in Mathura and Full in Dwaraka with His family and with Pradyumna 
and Aniruddha. In Goloka although Sree Krishna is conceived as Full, His 
Goloka Activities being the same as those of Brindabana, belong to the same 
category as the Fullest. In these Abodes (dhamas), on account of the difference 
of the degree of predominance of the mellow quality there is corresponding 
difference in the extent of the abeyance of the intensity of Divine Power as 
controlling Force. That is to say in proportion to the prevalence of mellowness 
there is corresponding obscuration of Power as compelling Force. In the nether 



worlds, due to lesser degree of mellowness, the aspect of Authority becomes 
more and more manifest. 


Prithivi is the first envelope of the universe constituted of the fourteen worlds 
beginning with Patala at one end and extending to Satyaloka on the other. 

This Prithivi as cause is the ingredient and support of the phenomenal universe 
as effect. The phenomenal universe is successively encased by the six 
outer envelopes of water, heat, air, sky, the ego and mahat. Outside these seven 
the eighth case is Nature (prakriti). This last is full of profound darkness and is 
the support of the whole universe. Time in the form of the power of activity of 
the Divinity is, in turn, the support of Nature. Time is upheld by the Will 
of Godhead. Beyond this is the stream of the Biraja so named from the fact that 
its water washes off all mundane qualities. This stream is situated between the 
chit (spiritual) and the achit (material) worlds. The Ocean of Cause 
(karanarnava) is the alternative name of Biraja. In the liquid causal current of 
the Biraja billions of worlds adorn the cavities of hair of Maha-Vishnu. Biraja is 
like the moat of Maha-Vaikuntha and the boundary of the luminous region of 
Brahman which forms the outer limit of Sree Vaikuntha. Sree Golokadhama is in 
the upper region of Sree Vaikuntha. The holy realm of Goloka is located in 
the centre of all mundane and spiritual manifestations of the Divine Power. 

In Goloka Sree Krishna abides with all His Family as Lord of Goloka, acting as 
a god. Dwaraka, Mathura and Braja are the successive inner tracts of Goloka. 

In the Abodes of Krishna bearing the names of Dwaraka, Mathura and 
Brindabana there is progressive increase in the proportion of mellowness due to 
the increasing preponderance of human activity. This leela is of two 
kinds according as it happens to be, (1) manifest, or (2) non-manifest. The 
nonmanifest leela is the name of that eternal pastime in which Krishna 
engages simultaneously as Boy, Adolescent and approaching Youth, in the 
company of His own mother, father, servants, friends, sweethearts, etc., in the 
infinite manifestation unperceivable by this world. The successive leelas as 
Boy, Adolescent and dawning Youth that He performs in the company of His kin 
and entourage in this world, in course of one and the same manifestation, are 
called His manifest leela. The manifest leela visible to this world has as its sole 
object the free bestowal of His mercy on the jivas. It is eternal. No sooner does it 
end in one universe than it rises in another like the rays of the sun lighting up 
the successive points of the zodiac in its progress; so that the manifest leela 
is always enacted simultaneously in different worlds but in its due order 
of successive appearance. All the manifest leeas of Sree Krishna in their 
perennial flow, are eternal and are all existence, all-consciousness and all-bliss, 



with the exception of the mausala leela and the leela of the abduction of His 
consorts, which are illusory and intended to mask the eternal nature of the series 
of His transcendental pastimes. 

The devotees appear next in the order of Descent. The Vaishnavas, as 
Markandeya, Ambarish, Vasu, Vyasa, Bivishana, Pundarik, Bali, 

Sambhu, Prahlada, Bidur, Uddhaba, Daliya Parasara, Bhishma, Narada, etc., are 
the devotees of Godhead. It is our duty to serve all these devotees in the same 
way as we serve Sree Hari. Otherwise offense is committed. Among the 
devotees the order of superiority is as follows: Prahlada; the Pandavas who are 
superior to Prahlada; the Yadavas of whom Uddhava is superior to the rest; the 
Braja-devis superior to Uddhava; Sree Radhika is the highest among the damsels 
of Braja. 

The four Yugas, viz., Satya, Treta, Dvapara and Kali are called divya-yugas. A 
thousand four-yugas form one kalpa. There are fourteen manvantaras in 
each kalpa. One day of Brahma is equivalent to one kalpa. The pralaya or 
complete absorption that takes place at the end of every kalpa is known as the 
night of Brahma. This is the daily pralaya. Thirty kalpas make one month of 
Brahma, twelve months of Brahma make one year; and fifty years of Brahma 
make one parardha. The duration of the life of Brahma is that of two parardhas. 
At the end of the period of two parardhas there is dissolution of phenomenal 
Nature and the attainment of the highest state by Brahma. Thereupon the 
phenomenal world is re-absorbed into the primordial principle (prakrid). The 
first of the series of the thirty Kalpas bears the name of Sveta Varaha or Brahma 
Kalpa and the last of the series as Pitri or Padma Kalpa. Thousands of the series 
of Kalpas from Brahma to Padma have passed away thousands of times. 

Theism has a long history which may be summed up in one word as the Descent 
of Godhead into this mundane world. Such Descent accomplishes two Divine 
Purposes, viz., (1) it is intended to gladden those devotees who may happen to be 
at the time in this world, and (2) to destroy Godhead’s opponents who oppress 
His devotees and obstruct their devotional activities. These opponents of 
Godhead are also deputed by Godhead Himself to serve Him by the method of 
opposition. There is and can be no real independent rival of Godhead, such as a 
so-called Satan, to be the captain-general of the sinners. 

The asuras, who disturb the devotees and are in consequence destroyed by 
Vishnu, appear to sinful jivas to undergo chastisement that they deserve 



by reason of their un-godliness. But those who are privileged to be chastised 
by Godhead are no sinners. Such chastisement is the appropriate reward of 
their real service of Godhead, although of an indirect nature. They are servitors 
of Godhead who appear in the world being deputed by Him for serving Him, 
in that way. By their opposition they serve to bring out most brilliantly the 
glory of Godhead. Ordinary jivas are not to follow their example; and, if they do 
so, they are not so easily delivered by direct Divine intervention. The fallen 
jivas are only delivered when their aversion to Godhead is eliminated. Their 
aversion to Godhead is due to ignorance of their own proper nature as eternal 
servants of Godhead. The Descent of Godhead into this world serves also to 
destroy the root of this ignorance of fallen jivas. This is His causeless mercy 
towards willful offenders. But all this is still only His secondary purpose. The 
main purpose of Divine Descent is to make the devotees happy. The secondary 
purposes are accomplished periodically by the various secondary Avataras who 
are endowed with the requisite measure of the Divine Power for that purpose. 
But the main purpose, viz., that of making His devotees happy, is effected only 
by the Descent of Godhead Himself. Sree Baladeva is the ultimate Source of all 
the secondary Avataras. He may be regarded as occupying the position of 
Viceroy for the performance of all official work of the Sovereign. Sree Baladeva 
destroys the asuras and protects the devotees and re-establishes the rule 
of righteousness. 

Krishna Himself comes into this world in the Sveta Varaha Kalpa (the cycle of 
the White Boar) of the Vaivasvata manvantara of the twenty-eighth aggregate 
of four-Yugas, appearing as Son of Yasoda, in His own eternal human Form in 
His fullest charm and power. The Son of Yasoda, is Godhead Himself, in 
His private, domestic, informal role, enjoying Himself unreservedly in the 
company of His own most beloved ones. 

The process of the Advent of Sree Krishna is thus described in the Scriptures. 

As the different gods prepare to descend into this world through the medium of 
the series of their respective subjective portions (amsas), the heavenly 
plenary portions of Vasudeva, etc., such as Kasyapa, etc., merging with their 
original sources (amsis), viz., Vasudeva, etc., who belong to the eternal Divine 
Leela, appear in Mathura as Sura, etc. The Highest Personality of the Divine 
Leela, viz., Sree Krishna, Whose manifest Form is Sree Narayana, Lord of 
Maha-Lakshmi, desiring to appear in Mathura, causes, first of all, the 
manifestation of His constituent Form, Samkarsana. Thereupon the Lord, having 



decided to make visible two other Forms that are Plenary Facsimiles of Himself 
and Who bear the Names of Pradyumna and Aniruddha, manifests Himself in 
the heart of Anakadundubhi. After this, in response to the prayer of the gods for 
the purpose of relieving the hard-pressed mundane world, towards the close of 
the Dvapara Age of the twenty-eighth aggregate of four- Yugas of the 
Vaivasvata manvantara, Aniruddha, the Same Who lies in Kshiroda, merging 
with the Form of Sree Krishna in the heart of Vasudeva, becomes manifest in the 
heart of Devaki moving thither from the heart of Anakadundubhi. Being 
nourished in the heart of Devaki by the nectar of loving bliss in the form of 
motherly affection, Sree Krishna, like the waxing Moon, manifests the 
gradual development of His Form in the heart of Devaki. Thereafter in the great 
night of the eighth day of the dark fortnight of the month of Bhadra Sree 
Krishna, disappearing from the heart of Devaki, appears in her couch in the 
lying-in chamber in the prison of Kamsa. The mother and the other people think 
that the Baby is born by the ordinary worldly process with the greatest ease. 

Thereupon Vasudeva entering the apartment of Yasoda in the Great Forest and 
leaving there his own Son Sree Krishna and taking away the daughter of Yasoda, 
hurries back to his prison. Some ancient Bhagavatas also hold that the first of 
Sree Krishna’s own Facsimiles, Who bears the Name of Vasudeva, appears in the 
apartment of Vasudeva and that in Gokula Sree Krishna, the Highest Personality 
of the Divine Leela, makes His Appearance in company of Yoga-maya. But 
Vasudeva sees only a daughter in the lying-in chamber of Yasoda. On 
Vasudeva’s return to Mathura with Yasoda’s baby-daughter Vasudeva merges 
into Sree Krishna. This is corroborated by such statements as the following, 
“Krishna born in the Yadava family is different.” “He Who is full Divinity is 
higher than He, that is to say, is His original Source.” “Divinity in His Plenitude, 
or Godhead Himself, never leaves Brindabana, nor goes elsewhere.” “He is 
always two-armed and is never four-armed.” “He always sports in Brindabana in 
the company of only one of the Gopees.” In the Padma Purana it is stated that 
the cowherds of Brindabana, such as Nanda, etc., with all families and birds, 
beasts, deer, etc., all of them, by the grace of Vasudeva assuming the heavenly 
form and mounted in chariots, attained the region of the highest Vaikuntha. This 
is explained as follows. Those constituent parts of the Lord of Braja, etc., viz., 
Drona, etc., who had come down into this world, were sent by Sree Krishna to 
Vaikuntha. But Sree Krishna is always sporting in Brindabana in the company of 
His most beloved devotees, viz., the denizens of Braja. 


The subject of the Avataras of Vishnu is vast and intricate and we have 



attempted merely to touch its outermost fringe in the above short account. 

But before we leave the subject it will be useful to deal briefly with a few of 
the controversial issues that are ordinarily associated with this subject. 

A distinction has been made between different, Avataras of Vishnu on the basis 
of partial and complete manifestation, and the partial manifestations have 
also been graded one under another in different groups, so that we have also part 
of a part, and so on. These distinctions do not mean that Godhead is a 
divisible entity. In fact in all these manifestations it is the indivisible and 
undivided Divinity Who appears. The difference is due either to the degree 
of manifestation or the greater or lesser presentation or reservation of 
any particular face or faces of the Divinity. Godhead is One but His powers 
are many and various and He can exercise all those powers in the way that He 
likes. This distinction between the Will of Godhead and the Power of 
Godhead, should be clearly grasped. The Will of Godhead constitutes His 
distinctive and specific personality. It is not delegated. But the Power Who is 
subordinate to the Will, is capable of delegation by the Will of Godhead. 
Godhead alone possesses an absolutely independent Will to Whom everything is 
subordinate. The wills with which other beings are endowed, are more or less 
limited in their effectiveness; that is to say, they are controlled, as regards their 
effective exercise in the shape of exerting power, by the Will of Godhead. The 
freedom of will of the jiva does not mean that the jiva can actually act as he 
likes, but that he is free to like or not like to act. The jiva has freedom to choose 
his course of action but such choice can result in effective action only by the 
Will of Godhead. The tendency is free but its issue is strictly controlled. There is 
no such gap between the Will and the Power to act, in Godhead. In Him alone 
the two are identical but yet not the same. The Power of Godhead is capable 
of delegation but the Will is not. Therefore it is the Will that constitutes 
the specific character of Divinity. 

The Divine Power is manifold although she is one in essence being the 
expression of the one and indivisible Divine Will. The gradation, that is 
noticed in the case of the different,Avataras, is in respect of distinction of 
power. Godhead chooses to manifest His powers partially or fully, directly 
or indirectly. This is what is meant by the gradation of the Avataras of Vishnu. 
The partial manifestation is regarded as the plenary subjective portion, or amsa, 
of His proximate whole to Whom He is immediately integrated. 


The relation between will and power is this that the latter always acts under the 



direction of the former. Power does not regulate herself. Will is the 
active principle of Whom power is the actively obedient associate. Power has 
no initiative of her own. But Will is not effective unless He is associated 
with power. Such dissociation is never possible in the Absolute in Whom the two 
are eternally associated and in this sense they may be regarded as being only 
complementary aspects of one and the same entity. Godhead’s Power is, 
therefore, not external or separable from Godhead Himself although she 
is always subordinate to His will. 

Godhead is the Possessor of infinite powers. Of these, according to the 
Scriptures, three only are realizable by the jiva viz., (1) the chit 
(cognitive energy), (2) jiva (differentiated souls), and (3) maya (limiting energy) 
There are also three functions that belong to each one of these three powers, viz., 
(1) sandhini (uniting), (2) sambit (enlightening), and (3) hladini 
(harmonising). These three functions are eternally operative in their pure and 
unmodifiable fullness in chit power. In differentiated souls they are also manifest 
but in an infinitesimally small measure. In maya the presence of only their dim 
reflection in a perverted form, is noticeable. To the individual soul the functions 
of the limiting energy are unwholesome. The functions of the individual soul 
himself, due to littleness of power, are inadequate although salutary. The jiva 
cannot attain perfect happiness except in conjunction with the Hladini Function 
of the Power of Enlightenment. This conjunction is possible only through the 
mercy of Krishna and His devotees. 

The coming down of the Absolute into this limited world, effects the deliverance 
of fallen jivas by bringing about this conjunction between the bound-jiva and the 
higher world. The difference of degree in the manifestation of the Divine Power 
represented by the different Avataras, is in accordance with the spiritual 
condition of the jzva at the time of such manifestation. The manifestation by way 
of Descent attains its perfection in Krishna. The other, Avataras dispel the 
ignorance of the fallen jiva and arouse in him, in varying degrees, the desire to 
worship Godhead with awe and reverence. Krishna, Who is the Source of all the 
Avataras, reserves to Himself the right of bestowing love for Godhead. This 
constitutes the supreme excellence of the Activities of Krishna when They 
appear in this world. In no Avatara, except in a small measure in those of 
Nrisingha and Ramachandra, is to be found the extreme deliciousness of the 
relationship of jiva with Godhead characterized by confidence and intimacy, that 
attains to freedom from all restraint in the case of the Braja-gopees, that is to be 
found in the Krishna Leela. Therefore, the mercy of Godhead reaches its climax 



in Krishna Who appears before the bound-jiva in the most intimate relationship, 
free from all reservation. The mercy of Krishna, in as much as He happens to be 
Godhead Himself, is thus superior to that of all other avataras. This fact is at the 
root of the broad differences that constitute the dividing line between the various 
religions. Such difference is due to the degree of intimacy of relationship that it 
offers between the jiva and Godhead. 

But the mercy of Godhead, which is so continuously, copiously and causelessly 
manifested, cannot be realized by the bound jiva due to his ignorance of its 
real nature. Sree Chaitanya came into this world to supply the knowledge of 
our natural relationship with Godhead which alone can enable us to realize 
the greatness of Divine mercy. Sree Chaitanya taught us that the highest service 
of Godhead, viz., that of unreserved loving devotion embodied in the Braja- 
devis, is spontaneously attainable to all of us as soon as we fully realize our 
true relationship with Godhead. That relationship may be briefly described as 
that of serving Sree Krishna under the lead of the Hladini Function of the 
Divine Power. This is not an abstraction of the human brain. On the highest 
spiritual plane such service is realized as a part and parcel of the amorous 
pastimes of the damsels of Braja under the lead of Sree Radhika with the 
youthful son of the Lord of Braja. This is the highest significance of Krishna 
Leela and is exemplified in the Career and Teaching of Sree Chaitanya. 

With these insufficient preliminary observations of a general character towards 
the elucidation of a number of current misconceptions on the subject of Religion, 
I shall venture to proceed to narrate the Transcendental Career of the Supreme 
Lord Sree Krishna-Chaitanya in course of the following chapters. 

The Narrative seeks to present the Absolute as He is in His Supreme 
Magnaminity. The Career of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya is identical with the 
Divine Personality in the Form of His Own Loving Service. It is not possible 
for individual souls, who are detached infinitesimal particles of the 
Marginal Potency of the Divinity, to realize the Nature of the Loving Service of 
the Divinity by His Own Integrated Power and his own proper function within 
the same, except by the Eternal Support of Divine Love Himself. The 
Magnanimous Activity of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya is identical with His Co¬ 
ordinate Absolute Activity as the Amorous Lover of Sree Radhika in Sree 
Brindavana. The individual soul has, therefore, no access to the Realm of the 
Amorous Pastimes of Sree Sree Radha-Govinda except by the realization of this 
identity of relationship between the Two distinct Leelas. 



Nota De Edicion 


“The existing English works although they sometimes profess to be historical in 
reality offer a superficial, extremely crude and misleading view of the 
subject. They confine themselves almost exclusively to the esoteric issues. This 
at least is not the method of the source-books, but a departure from the bona 
fide position of the theme itself. The historical method proper should aim 
at presenting the religion as it is really found in the genuine original sources 
and in the spirit of its first propounders. But many of these writers, due to 
their empirical training, have failed to observe this essential canon of 
historical judgment. Moreover these writers generally happen to be very poorly 
equipped in respect of their knowledge of the vast body of Scriptures to which 
the teachings of Sree Chaitanya stand in the closest relationship; and, even if any 
of them happen to possess a general acquaintance with the texts of 
these Scriptures, they fail to take a scientific view of the subject due to lack 
of spiritual insight.” 

“The prominent defects that mar the value of these works are the purely empiric 
point of view of their authors, their want of spiritual knowledge of the Scriptures 
and their lack of critical caution in the choice and use of authorities.” 

“.The empiric method is unsuitable for the treatment of a spiritual subject. 

The vision of the empiricist is confined to things of this world. The Vaishnava 
authors on whose narratives we have to base our account of Sree 
Chaitanya, were not empiricists. The subject of which they have left us the 
account, is the Absolute, as distinct from the empiric, Truth that comes down to 
them in the chain of disciplic succession from Godhead Himself. They acquired 
this esoteric vision, when they prove to be true, by the methods of loyal 
submission and sincere service at the feet of spiritual preceptors as enjoined by 
the Scriptures on all those who desire to obtain spiritual enlightenment. They are 
never tired of repeating that the Absolute Truth, inherent in a bona fide soul, 
who expresses himself in their books’ is not derived from any experience of 
this world and is not intelligible to those whose vision is obscured by 
knowledge derived from the experience of this world.” 

“The Absolute Truth is transcendental and, therefore, no human being can attain 
to Him by his sensuous efforts, i.e., by the ascending process, as all phenomena 




that are exposed to the faulty, limited senses are, by this virtue, non- 
transcendental. The Absolute Truth is eternally existent but is not realizable by 
men so long as they are not relieved of the aptitude, of their defective vision. 

The Absolute Truth is to be received, undoubtedly in the spirit of honest inquiry, 
from those wise men who bear no reference to the world of their sensuous 
gratification.” 

“Very few of the existing English works on Sree Chaitanya satisfy these essential 
conditions of theistic authorship that are so strongly insisted upon by these 
devotional writers without which such description carries no useful purpose. On 
the contrary, these later writers are apt to offer their own views, derived from 
their empiric association, regarding the subject-matter of the original works, in a 
manner that leaves on the mind of the reader the impression that they are more 
anxious to point out the crudities and errors of these old authors than exhibit 
their views in a scientific and impartial manner. This is certainly neither history 
nor religion but only an uncalled-for and useless distortion of both.” 

“The object of writing this book is to place before the English-knowing readers a 
strictly accurate theistic account, of Sree Chaitanya, Who teaches the Absolute 
Truth that has been handed down through the Ages by an unbroken succession of 
unbiased spiritual preceptors. This narrative is broad-based on all the 
authoritative sources and seeks to fully present the esoteric side as explaining the 
esoteric in pursuance of the method of all really enlightened writers on spiritual 
subjects.” 

“...The Deeds of Sree Chaitanya, the Subject of the present work, are the living 
Embodiment of the teaching of Srimad Bhagawatam. The Deeds and 
Teachings of Sree Chaitanya stand alone as history of the service of the Supreme 
Lord in the form of the deepest and perfectly unreserved intimacy. 

The privilege of this form of service, the hidden truth of all Scriptures, was never 
before given to the fallen jiva. In the words of Sree Rupa Goswami Prabhu, the 
authority on the esoteric significance of the Deeds of Sree Chaitanya, “God 
Himself with the beautiful golden complexion out of mercy appeared in this 
world in this most degenerate Age to confer the grace of devotion to Himself, of 
the superior order that had not been given to this world before. Even the Geet a 
which teaches the service of Godhead with singleminded devotion and in the 
spirit of complete self-surrender, does not tell us much about the actual, concrete 
form of the highest service. The Srimad Bhagawatam describes all different 



kinds of service in the concrete form and establishes the supreme excellence of 
that which was practised by the transcendental milk-maids of Braja. Sree 
Chaitanya is the living Embodiment of this highest and most intimate form of 
the service of the Divinity.” 

“The Brindabana pastimes of Sree Krishna, which have been given the place of 
honour in the greatest devotional work of the whole world, are of all forms 
of Divine service the one that is also liable to be most grossly misunderstood. 
The subject will be treated in greater detail in its proper place in the body of 
this work. It will suffice for our purpose here to state that Sree Chaitanya 
made clearly manifest by His Deeds and Teachings what this form of service 
really means. His Deeds are in fact the Brahmasutra, Geet a and the 
Srimad Bhagawatam displayed to our view in the living form. He is the living 
Vedanta. Other Avatars and prophets have taught the reverential worship of the 
Supreme Lord. Sree Chaitanya proved by His Deeds that the highest form of 
service is to be found in the Srimad Bhagawatam, that its inner meaning had not 
been properly understood up to His time by anybody and that it offers what all 
the Scriptures have been endeavouring from eternity unsuccessfully to express. 

Sree Chaitanya's own career is the concrete living expression of this highest 
form of the service of the Lord.” 

“...The materials for the present work have been drawn from— (1) the 
Sikshastakam of Sree Chaitanya which gives the summary of His teachings 
in His own words; (2 and 3) the Karchas (memoirs) of Sree Murari Gupta and 
of Sree Swarup Damodar (the latter as embodied in his works by Sree 
Raghunath Das Goswamin, Sree Swarup Damodar’s closest associate); (4) 
Prema Vivarta of Sree Jagadananda; (5) Sree-Krishna-Chaitanya-Chandrodaya- 
Nataka of Kavi Karnapur; (6) Sree-Chaitanya-Charitamahakavya of Sree 
Chaitanya Das, the elder brother of Kavi Karnapur; (7) the works of Sree 
Prabodhananda Saraswati; (8) the Bhajanamrita of Sree Narahari Sarkar Thakur; 
(9) the numerous works left by five of the famous six Goswamins; (10) 

Sree Brind bandas Thakur’s Sree-Chaitanya-Bhagawat; (1) Sree 
Lochandas's Chaitanya-Mangal; (12) Sree Krishnadas Kaviraj’s Sree- 
Chaitanya-Charitamrita and lastly (13) the works of those later writers who 
have strictly followed the above authors. Most of these works are in Sanskrit, 
some of them in Bengali. 


“Sree Chaitanya has not left any books written by Himself. A few shlokas 



composed by Him are quoted in the works of His associates, the chief of 
them being the Siksh astakam which gives in eight stanzas a summary of 
his teachings.” “...Sree Brindabandas Thakur was the recipient of the favour of 
Sree Nityananda, the associated facsimile, so to say, of Sree Chaitanya. His 
mother Sree Narayani was the niece of Sribash Pandit, the foremost of those 
Vaishnava householders who were the direct followers of Sree Chaitanya. Sree 
Lochandas got the materials of his work partly from Narahari Sarkar Thakur, one 
of Sree Chaitanya’s close associates and by his devotional impressions. Sree 
Krishnadas Goswamin got his information as has already been mentioned from 
his preceptor Sree Raghun athd as, one of the six Goswamins.” “Most of the 
works of the authors named above are still extant and they are the authorities for 
all subsequent writers. The chief of these later authors whose works have been 
consulted in the compilation of the present account are, (1) Sree Narottamdas 
Thakur who was the disciple of Sree Lokanath Goswamin, one of the closest 
associates of Sree Chaitanya, (2) Sree Viswanath Chakravarty belonging to the 
line of disciples of Sree Narottamdas Thakur, (3) Sree Baladev Vidyabhusan the 
first Gaudiya commentator of the Brahmasutra, (4) Sree Narahari Chakravarty 
in the line of disciplic descent from Sree Viswan ath Thakur, (5) Sree 
Bhaktivinode Thakur, the sincere guardian of the true Vaishnavas of the present 
day, and (6) my Sree Gurudeva, His Divine Grace Paramahansa 
Paribrajakacharya Sree Sreemat Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Goswami Maharaj 
whose mercy is my only hope of attaining the service of Godhead.” 

“It will be seen from the above that there is no lack of materials of the most 
reliable character available to the historian of the Career and Teachings of 
Sree Chaitanya. It is, therefore, rather strange that the personality of Sree 
Chaitanya has been misunderstood and misrepresented by a certain class of 
writers. The neglect of the original sources was one cause of this. A constructive 
motive was supplied by the animosity of sectarians and the greed of worldly 
interests of pseudo-followers.” 

“It was the life-work of Thakur Bhaktivinode to re-discover the true history of 
Sree Chaitanya and make the same available to the present generation. 

The magnitude of this service to his country, to humanity and to all animate 
beings time alone will show. The eternal religion taught and practiced by 
Sree Chaitanya have been made intelligible to the modern reader by the labours 
of Thakur Bhaktivinode. It is bound to re-act most powerfully on all 
existing religious convictions of the world and make possible the establishment 
of universal spiritual harmony of which the whole world stands so much in 



need. Most of the works of Thakur Bhaktivinode were, however, written in 
Bengali and Sanskrit. The present work is a slight attempt to present in the 
English language an outline of the Life and Teachings of Sree Chaitanya made 
known by Thakur Bhaktivinode, the pioneer of the movement of pure devotion 
in the present Age, which aims at restablishing in practice the eternal religion of 
all animate beings revealed in the Scriptures and taught and practiced by 
Sree Chaitanya. The activities of my most revered Preceptor are well known to 
the world. His Divine Grace is commissioned by Godhead to spread the 
Teaching of Sree Chaitanya to every village of the world and re-establish the 
spiritual society. This was foretold by Thakur Bhaktivinode.” 

Gaura Hari Bol! 

Visuddha Sattva dasanudasa 


Volume II 



Auspicatory Observance 

I make my prostrated obeisance to Sree Guru in the two forms of the Guide who 
imparts enlightenment and those who teach the function of Divine service to 
prevent lapse into the conditioned state by ensuring progressive advance on the 
path of devotion. Obeisance to the Devotees of the Lord, to the Supreme Lord 
Himself, to those eternal Forms in which the Lord manifests His Appearances 
(Avataras) on this mundane plane, to His different Manifestations and His 
Powers! I bow to the Name Krishna Chaitanya Who is Krishna Himself and all 
the Divine Categories. Obeisance to Sree Krishna-Chaitanya with 
Lord Nityananda Who are like the Sun and the Moon risen in conjunction on 
the Eastern Hill of Gauda ! Lord Sree Krishna-Chaitanya manifested 
His Appearance in this world in order to give away by His causeless mercy 
the highest loving service of Himself that had never been bestowed on 
the conditioned souls of this world prior to His Appearance. May Lord Sree 
Krishna-Chaitanya, resplendent with the concentrated hue of beauteous shining 
gold, manifest Himself in the inmost chamber of the hearts of all persons! 

Submission to Sree Hari, Sree Guru and the Vaishnavas is the only condition of 
attaining to loving devotion to the Feet of Sree Krishna and His devotees. 

The fulfillment of this condition assures the success of the undertaking by 
enabling all persons who listen to the Narrative of the Deeds of Sree Krishna- 
Chaitanya to obtain His mercy in the shape of the highest quality of devotion to 
the Feet of Sree Radha-Krishna. 

Sree Krishnadas Kaviraj Goswami in the opening verses of his work on the 
Deeds of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya has mercifully explained in some detail, 
for our benefit, the nature, purpose and necessity of the auspicatory observance 
as a preliminary for the success of all spiritual undertakings. I can do no 
better than follow in his footsteps by attempting to explain the significance of 
the form of the auspicatory observance. 

The auspicatory observance consists of three parts, viz, (1) the postulation of the 
subject-matter, (2) benedictory purpose, and (3) offering of 
submissive obeisance. 


The subject-matter of the present work is Sree Krishna Chaitanya. 



Sree Krishna-Chaitanya is identical with Sree Krishna. He is the Final and 
Absolute Reality. He is Isvara, the Gurus, the Devotees, the Divine 
Appearances and the Divine Powers. These are the distinctive Divine Identities. 
The undifferentiated Brahman of the Upanishads is the glow of His Person. 

The Oversoul, Who indwells and regulates every entity, is His Portion. 
Bhagawan, Who is full of all Supremacy, all Power, all Glory, all Beauty, all 
Knowledge and 

Freedom from every mundane Desire, is Sree Chaitanya. There is no higher 
Entity than Chaitanya and Sree Krishna. 

The Deeds of the Supreme Lord Sree Krishna-Chaitanya are narrated in this 
work. His Deeds were made manifest to the view of the people of this world that 
all conditioned souls may be enabled thereby to attain to the realization of loving 
devotion to the Feet of Sree Sree Radha-Govinda, which constitutes the highest 
platform of the service of the Divinity and the knowledge of which had not been 
divulged to any soul of this world by any former Dispensation. All this will flash 
to the hearts of all persons who really seek for the Truth, by the causeless mercy 
of the Son of Sree Sachi Devi wearing the yellow colour of shining gold. 

The Deeds of Sree Chaitanya are grounded in His Divinity!-. The Activity of the 
Hlhadini Potency born of the reciprocal Love of Sree Sree Radha Krishna, 

Who constitute One Personality, brings about differentiation of Divine Body 
as Couple. The Two Bodies of the Divine Couple re-unite as Chaitanya. 

The united Form is Krishna's Own self clothed with the glow of the Beauty of 
Sree Radhika. 

The secondary Purpose of the Appearance of Sree Krishna Chaitanya in this 
world found in the Scriptures is what has been stated above, viz., the bestowal of 
loving devotion to all conditioned souls. But there was another Purpose which is 
the main cause of His Appearance. It is not explicitly mentioned in 
the Scriptures but is recognizable as their hidden Import. 

The main Purpose of the Appearance of the Supreme Lord Sree Krishna- 
Chaitanya is connected with His distinctive Nature that has been indicated. 
Krishna is anxious to learn how His Divine Counter-Whole, Sree 
Radhika, realizes His Own Sweetness and Beauty. In order to have this 
experience Sree Krishna clothes Himself with the mood of Sree Radhika and 
appears in the Form of an Eternal Union with Her, alongside of and identical 



with the coupled Form. 


This is the inner hidden significance of the Deeds of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya. 
This distinguishes the Leela of Sree Chaitanya from that of Sree Krishna. 

Sree Nityananda and Sree Advaita are inseparably associated with the 
Appearance of Sree Chaitanya in this world. It is not possible to realize 
the nature of the Deeds of Sree Chaitanya without the knowledge of 
the Personalities of Sree Nityananda and Sree Advaita. 

Through Nityananda and Advaita the connection of Sree Krishna with the 
mundane world is established and maintained. This brings us to the question 
of the transcendental cosmology of the Scriptures. There is a gradation of 
spheres one above another up to Goloka, the Abode of Sree Krishna. In Goloka 
are found Baladeva, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, the “Other Selves” of 
Krishna. Nityananda is identical with Baladeva in Goloka. 

Below Goloka, in the realm of the Absolute, is Vaikuntha. In Goloka Balarama 
or Baladeva is the serving Self of Krishna (Bilas-bigraha). Baladeva is Krishna 
in the role of serving His Own Self in various capacities. Vaikuntha is the realm 
of the exclusive Activities of Baladeva. In Vaikuntha, accordingly, the 
fourfold expansion of Sree Narayana, the Lord of Vaikuntha, the manifestation 
of Baladeva corresponds to the “Other Selves” of Krishna in Goloka with 
the difference that in Vaikuntha the “expansion” (byuha.) is of the “Other Self” 
of Krishna or Baladeva Who is delegated the power of expressing his service 
of Sree Krishna in a realm of his own where His plenary Manifestation, 

Sree Narayana, is served by the method of reverence. Baladeva and his realm 
of Vaikuntha express and serve the Majesty of Sree Krishna. The conception of 
the service of Sree Baladeva, the Majestic Other Self of Krishna, is the highest 
that is reached by the help of such imperfect Revelation as is not wholly 
unacceptable to the empiric instinct, although the practice of this pure form of 
the reverential service is also very rare in this world. All the revealed Scriptures, 
with the single exception of the Bhagawatum, are to a more or less extent the 
text-books of reverential worship. The reverential service of Godhead in its 
genuine form is wholly free from any mundane grossness, although there is in it 
a comparative reference of eligibility. The ordinary degenerate practices of 
the revealed religions are a caricature of the real function which cannot be 
realized till the soul is released from the fetters of Nescience. 



In Vaikuntha there exist positive transcendental activities resulting from the 
relationships of servants and Master between the individual souls and 
Godhead. But Godhead is there present in His Majesty and not in His Beauty 
and Sweetness except in the sense that is compatible with the predominance of 
His Majesty. The ideal of Heaven and Paradise of the Elevationist religions is 
a misrepresentation of Vaikuntha in terms of mundane felicity. Vaikuntha 
is, however, the goal that is dear to ordinary theistically inclined persons 
with pure morals. It is substantially inconceivable but is not apparently opposed 
to the ordinary aspirations and functions of this world, at the first sight. 

Next below Vaikuntha is the realm of the Brahman in which there is no specific 
spiritual activity neither any form of worldly existence but which is full of a light 
which has the negative quality of dispelling all worldly ignorance 
without having power to disclose the specific nature of the transcendental realm. 
This is the realm of the Brahman of the Upanishads, which has been the source 
and support, as manipulated by Sree Sankaracharya, of the empiric worship 
current in this country that denies the existence of Godhead and substitutes in 
place of the religion of His service one aiming at complete spiritual annihilation 
by the process of merging the individual soul in the Divinity. As a matter of fact 
the realm of the Brahman of the Upanishads is not a habitable region at all but 
a sphere of light which has to be got across to reach the realm from where 
it proceeds and with which alone the emancipated soul can have anything 
really to do. 

The realm of the Brahman is the outer limit of the Absolute world. Between this 
outer uninhabited zone of the spiritual realm and the highest sphere of 
this mundane world there flows the stream of the Biraja whose water is the 
causal essence in the nascent form of liquid. This liquid is pure from all 
mundane quality. A person who bathes in the river prior to entry into the realm 
of the Brahman is freed from all mundane aptitudes. 

It is in this stream that there appears the Purusha, Who is the derivative of 
Balarama, being a secondary plenary Form of the Divinity. There are 
three Purushas in the successive order of such secondary derivative 
manifestation, viz, (1) He, Who lies in the Ocean of the causal water of the 
Biraja, (2) He Who lies in the-water of the Ocean of Milk, and (3) He Who lies 
in the Ocean of the fluid of the Womb of the worlds. It is these Purushas, the 
secondary extended Selves of Baladeva, each being the proximate source of the 
One next following Him, Who are the Creators and Regulators of the mundane 



world without being themselves any constituent part, or whole, of the same. 


The first of these three Purushas wills the creation of the world and wills to 
make use of the deluding Potency for the purpose. In respect of the process 
of material creation He occupies the position that the potter occupies in 
the making of pots of clay. The potter's wheel, clay and appliances attain 
their effective existence by another potency of the same Purusha. It is, therefore, 
the first of the series of the Purushas Who is the source of both the efficient as 
well as material cause of creation. But in neither capacity He Himself belongs to 
this world. He does all this work from outside the plane of the limiting 
energy. Brahma and Siva are connected with the material energy by 
actual incorporation with her. While Vishnu (the Purusha), although exercising 
His function with reference to the material world, is situated wholly beyond 
all touch with, the material energy. The Purushas bear the Name of Vishu 
by reason of this transcendental pervading relationship with the mundane world. 

As transcendence, in the form of both cause and material of the mundane 
creation, belongs to the first Purusha, the second Purusha is charged by Him with 
the function of the collective regulation of the created entities. The third Purusha 
performs the same function from inside each separate created entity. 

These two, therefore, are the sources of those spiritual functions that bear some 
analogy to the imperfect empiric notions, enunciated hy Kant and 
other philosophers of the idealist schools of the West, conveyed by the ill- 
defined terms, Immanence and Transcendence. These terms of the empiric 
vocabulary refer to aspects of limited phenomena but the immanence and 
transcendence of the third and second Purusha Avataras of Vishnu are not a 
continuum of the material shelf which is called phenomenon. There.is always the 
categorical difference of plane between the phenomena and the spiritual 
transcendent and immanent functions of Vishnu that have a reference to them by 
way of being their spiritual source. 

The functions of Brahma and Siva are those of creation and destruction. These 
two great personages belong to this phenomenal world and are in charge of 
its temporal regulation in a semi-conscious manner. The semi-conscious nature 
of the ruling functions of Brahma and Siva makes them the prototypes of 
the conditioned soul. They are the ideals of personality conceivable by the mind 
of man, possessed of the super-human powers of creation and destruction of 
all phenomena. The nature of this power itself is not intelligible to its 



wielders although they knou that they are really endowed with the same by 
some unknown superior agency in an unknown manner. There are other 
“powers” of this class who wield similar but lesser powers over the phenomenal 
world than Brahma and Siva. These super-human beings possessed of specific 
powers over physical nature in different measures, are the highest order of souls 
in the conditioned state. 

The Will of Vishnu in the Forms of the three Purushas is ultimately derived from 
Nityananda. The source of the material cause of creation is also Vishnu in the 
Form of the first Purusha or Maha-Vishnu in whom the Material cause 
and creating Will of the Divinity by reference to this mundane world 
are incorporated and reconciled. 

The word ‘Advaita’ means ‘non-duality’. Matter and Will are not categorically 
different from one another at their source. Neither are they, as regards 
their source, different from Godhead. But matter as it appears to the 
conditioned soul as well as the operative will of Godhead as viewed by the same 
agency, appear to be altogether dissociated from and incompatible with the 
spiritual essence which is the Nature proper of the Divinity. The solution of 
this difficulty that besets all speculative inquiry is to be sought in the 
actual knowledge of the substantive Reality in His graduated Manifestations and 
not in the hypotheses of inevitable ignorance of fundamental conditions. 

The Appearance of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya so far as the Event has a reference to 
the deliverance of conditioned souls, was effected by the agencies of Nityananda 
and Advaita. The functions of Nityananda and Advaita should, however, be 
neither over-estimated nor underestimated as regards Their respective bearings 
on the Deeds of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya. Those functions are of primary 
importance, to the conditioned soul who, however, need not, therefore, remain 
confined to the contemplation of these plenary Manifestations of the Divinity. 
Neither need the conditioned soul suppose himself to be above all help from 
Advaita and Nityananda either at the initial or the advanced stages of spiritual 
endeavour and realisation. 

The Real Purpose of the Appearance of Sree KrishnaChaitanva is not the 
deliverance of the conditioned souls. The Real Purpose is one that 
exclusively concerns the Divinity as He is. It is that which was meant when we 
observed above that the Deeds of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya, as Those of Sree 
Krishna, are grounded in His Divinity. The Knowledge of those Deeds is 



identical with the Deeds Themselves. It is for this reason that it is necessary to 
approach this Narrative with the reverence and confidence that is due to the 
Person of Godhead Himself. Such reverence and confidence are also necessarily 
complete. There must be no reservation. The least reservation will lead the 
hearer or reader of this Narrative to a certain face of the limited energy and not 
even to the level of the Purusha Avataras Who are related to this world without 
being of it. 

But the mercy of Sree Krishna:Chaitanya enables all conditioned souls to pass 
through an these graded stages of spiritual progress, by appearing to us in 
the form of this Divine Narrative of His Deeds. This Narrative has been 
made available by the mercy of Sree Advaita and Sree Nityananda Who are the 
eternal Divine Intermediaries between ourselves and the Supreme Lord. 

The function of making our prostrated obeisance to Hari, Guru and the 
Vaishnavas is not an idle or symbolic ceremony. It is exercise of the function 
of devotion to Godhead made possible by the causeless grace of Sree Advaita 
who is the source of the material as well as the sanction of all spiritual, functions 
of us, conditioned souls, under all circumstances. Obeisance to Sree Advaita 
is obeisance to the Vaishnavas. Obeisance to Nityananda is obeisance to 
Sree Guru. Obeisance to Sree Krishna-Chaitanva is obeisance to Godhead 
Himself as He is. Obeisance to Sree Krishna-Chaitanya is obeisance both to Sree 
Krishna and His Divine Counter-Whole Sree Radhika in One. 

The relationship of Sree Radhika to Sree Krishna must not be confounded with 
the mundane sexual relationship between male and female of this world. 

The service of Sree Radhika is not an amorous function in the disruptive 
specific unwholesome sense of the analogous mundane activity. That 
supposition, which is due to the mundane import of the term used in describing 
the Divine Function, may lead the ignorant critic to presume to find the defects 
of the mundane passion in even the Divine Activity as He is, i.e., in His Fullest 
and Most Perfect Manifestation. It is, therefore, necessary to implore our readers 
not to approach the study of this Narrative in such unnecessarily irreverent 
and superficial temper which will necessarily prevent his regarding the subject 
from the only genuine point of view, viz., that of the Scriptures. It is only by 
loyally following the method of submitting to look at the subject unreservedly 
from the point of view of the Narrative itself that it will be possible for the 
impartial reader, after he has gone through his self-imposed task with the 
patience that is due to the right understanding of a subject which is likely to be 



radically different, at any rate to many of our European readers, from most 
current standards in its outlook on and valuation of the activities of this world, 
to attempt to form a comparative estimate of the view of the Absolute that 
is presented to him in the following pages. 

Vaishnavism stands alone among the revealed Religions of the world in 
providing a specific account of the Name, Form, Qualities, Activities and 
the individual personalities of the Servitors of Godhead Himself. The silence of 
the other Religions on this subject should not be misunderstood as implying 
the non-existence of any or all specification in the Absolute. There is also 
no rational ground for supposing that Godhead is unwilling or unable to 
disclose His Own Specific Self and Divine Paraphernalia to the serving impulse 
of pure souls. 



All Glory to Sree Guru and Gauranga SREE KRISHNA-CHAITANYA 


Chapter 1 Country and Society 

The historical significance of the term Gauda, the name that is borne by the 
country of Sree Chaitanya's Nativity is obscure. It occurs in the works of 
the famous Grammarian Panini as the name of a well-known city ‘of the East’. 
The geographical location of the regions bearing the name, referred to in 
ancient literature, presents a bewildering variety, being applied to tracts and 
towns scattered in all directions and attaining an extent that is sometimes 
equivalent to the greater part of Northern India. It supplies the designation to a 
wide division of the Brahmanas, a well known style of the Sanskrit rhetoricians 
and a technical term, connected with the metal ‘silver’, to the industrialists, of 
Old India. The name of the spiritual preceptor of Sree Sankaracharya is 
Gaudapada, While Sreeman Madhvacharya, an inhabitant of the extreme south 
of the country, bears the interesting name of “Gaudapurnananda”. No 
theory regarding the historical origin or application of the word is yet 
forthcoming that offers any satisfactory clue to the copious use of the word by 
the ancients in such diverse connections. 

There is evidence to prove that there were similar grades in the geographical 
denotation of the word ‘Gauda’ also at the period of the Advent of 
Sree Chaitanya. It was then applied to (1) the country under the rule of 
the Muhammedan King of Bengal, (2) to his Capital situated in the modern 
district of Malda, (3) to the tract adjoining the old town of Nabadwip to which 
the Capital of the country had been transferred from Gauda in Malda 
by Lakshmana Sena, the last independent Hindu King of Bengal; (4) while 
the compound ‘pancha-Gauda ‘the five Gaudas’ meant practically the whole 
of Northern India and, specifically, (5) the five countries of Kurukshetra, 
Kanauj, Utkal, Mithila and Gauda (Bengal), (6) the Brahmana residents of 
which regions were also designated as ‘pancha-Gaudd The terms ‘Gauda’ and 
‘Gauda-mandald (Circle of Gauda) used by the associates and followers of 
Sree Chaitanyadeva, as a designation of themselves and their country, mean 
the greater part of the modern province of Bengal with old Nabadwip ‘the city 
of the Nine Islands,’ as centre; and for the purpose of this Narrative we 
shall accordingly accept this external regional denotation of the word, without 
losing sight of its true spiritual import. 



But it is well at the very outset to remind our readers of the historical fact that 
neither the Land nor the Activities of Sree Chaitanya are regarded by the authors 
of the works that form the original sources of this account, as historical, 
geographical, or any other entities in the mundane sense. The Gaudamandala, or 
Circle of Gauda is to them the spiritual realm of the Appearance of the Supreme 
Lord Sree Krishna-Chaitanya and. His eternally associated devotees. The 
spiritual significance of their attitude may be thus indicated. Godhead is All- 
powerful. There is a transcendental world in which He dwells with His Own. 

The only business of all inhabitants of that world is to serve Godhead directly. 
That world is the spiritual world. It is free from all limitations and defects of this 
mundane world. When Godhead chooses to come down into this world, He 
never does so only by Himself. Just as a high and mighty Sovereign of this 
mundane world, when he chooses to favour a remote part of his dominions with 
his Royal visit, goes there with his attendants and other paraphernalia of 
sovereignty, in like manner Godhead also descends into this world with His 
Own, His Servitors, all His Divine Paraphernalia, and His Eternal Spiritual 
Realm. It is not possible for any earthly sovereign, even if he is so minded, to 
move out with all the circumstances and pomp of his Royal Magnificence, for 
sheer want of power and for other obvious reasons. But Godhead is not troubled 
by such difficulties. He is here in this world with His realm and complete 
followings and is present at one and the same time in His fully manifest realm of 
the spiritual world. That is to say, Divinity and His Realm without being 
duplicated, is capable of revealing Himself according to the serving aptitude of 
mundane beholders. 

It is this which happens when the Supreme Lord manifests His Auspicious 
Appearance in this world. The realm of Gauda in which Sree Krishna- 
Chaitanya appears with His kindred, associates and eternal devotees, is not the 
mundane region that is visible to the eyes of conditioned souls. The Spiritual 
Circle of Gauda that appears to bound jivas in the figure of a definite tract of 
land of this physical world, is, in reality, in its own manifest nature, no other than 
the " White Island” (Svetadveepa) of the Scriptures, the eternal realm of the 
Divinity in His Own Most Beneficent Form. This principle of spiritual identity 
of periodic manifestation also applies to other parts of the sacred land of 
Bharata (India). This sacredness of the land is not a figment of the human 
imagination nor due to any association of any mundane country with the 
Appearances of the Divinity by way of fortuitous concurrences. The Holy Realm 
of Godhead, in all its infinite vastness and diversity, appears also in this world 
being identical with spiritual Bharata (India) as its centre. But spiritual Bharata 



is not always manifest to the view of fettered souls. When the Divinity chooses 
to come down into this world, the spiritual realm is also unveiled to the 
unobstructed gaze of mortals. ‘But unbelievers do not see what is then really 
opened to their view, just as the owl does not see the light of the Sun when he 
shines in all his midday splendour.’ 

It would not also be in strict conformity with historical judgment to regard the 
view just sketched as an exaggeration of patriotic partiality for the land of 
one’s mundane birth. The Vaishnava point of view is that everything of this 
world is to be used in the service of Godhead, and it is only by such use of the 
most beautiful and valued things of this world that man is enabled to earn 
the position of the highest distinction that is open to him on this condition. 

This level of view regarding human life and this world, which marks the 
highest achievement of human civilization, has, of all countries of the world, 
been most nearly realized by the spiritual community of Vaishnavas in India. 
Indeed, Godhead Himself comes into this world only for the sake of the 
Vaisnavas who follow faithfully His highest teaching by desiring, instead of 
piety (dharma), wealth, sensuous pleasure, relief from worldly misery, etc., 
which are universally coveted by all mortals, only the unconditional service of 
the Divinity. In all parts of the world less spiritual people have always 
been engaged in a perpetual strife for the fulfillment of their mundane 
aspirations. Godhead has sometimes sent His agents to teach the peoples of other 
countries the transitory and miserable end of all worldly pursuits and thereby 
win them to desire for liberation and moral living. But such mere improvement 
of the procedure of earthly pursuits effected thereby, the summum bonum, in the 
shape of the unalloyed spiritual service of the Supreme Lord, is never attained. 
The quasi spiritual ideals help at best to establish a certain apparently moral 
order amidst the unrestrained pursuit of sensuous activities. 

These facts offer the undisputed evidence that is historically available to all of 
us, which establishes the spiritual superiority of the theistic civilization in 
India and its premier claim to the Mercy of the Divinity by the sole right of 
His unalloyed service. The patriotic or any other worldly sentiment, has no place 
in such views. 

As India is thus the most sacred country of the world, the land of Gauda is the 
most sacred of all parts of India. This is so because it corresponds 
to ‘ Svetadveep’ wherein the Divinity abides eternally as Embodiment of 
Perfect Magnanimity. The land Braja, full of the most exquisite bliss, is the 



realm of the most delicious Rasa A l Amorous dance of Krishna in the circle of 
the spiritual milkmaids. 

1 pastimes of Youthful Krishna Who is identical with Sree Chaitanya. The land 
of Gauda is most liberal, as it is only here that Godhead manifests the of 
bestowing on all the unalloyed love for Himself which alone confers on 
the emancipated jiva^ A 3 the right of entry into the happy realm of Braja and 
join there in the eternal pastimes of Sree Sree Radha-Govinda. Therefore, for 
the same reason which makes the Svetadveepa in Sree Brindavana 
more magnanimous, the land of Gauda is more liberal than the enchanting realm 
of Braja overflowing with every bliss. There is also a corresponding mellowness 
in the subdued charms, reminiscent of the chastened mood of faithful 
lovers temporarily parted, of this land of Gauda, which can be utilised by any 
one who cares to enter its wide portals ever open to receive, with the 
unspeakable welcome of Divine love in its most unreserved and indiscriminate 
generosity, all those who want to receive the summum bonum free gift from the 
Hands of Godhead Himself . 

The reader will now be in a position to understand why, the Vaishnava authors 
expatiate on the minutest features of the holy Circle of Gauda with such 
intense devotional fervour and why we can perfectly rely on any information of 
a historical or geographical nature, that they may have cared to record, as 
being free from all sectarian bias in its ordinary narrow worldly sense; as the 
genuine Vaishnava authors have nothing to do that is worldly either in their life 
or in their faith for which alone they live Most of these Acharayas lived 
by themselves a secluded life far from home and family on scanty alms 
procured by short rounds of day-to-day begging or given unsolicited by well 
wishers, and in the humblest styles conceivable even in India. Many of the 
them discarded inherited worldly affluence for greater convenience of 
devoting themselves to the practice of the religion which forms the subject of 
this work and for recording and expounding its principles for the benefit of all 
animate beings. Such is the spiritual Circle of Gauda and all truly pure souls are 
the denizens of the Eternal Realm of the Divinity. 

The remains of old Nabadwip, the city of the ‘Nine Islands’ are situated at the 

junction of the Bhagirathi and Jalangi rivers bout sixty-five miles 

above Calcutta. The present town of Nabadwip one of the ‘Nine Islands’ of old 


Nabadwip. The name Nabadwip at the time of Sree Chaitanya was applied to the 



actual conglomerate of nine separate islands cut up by the channels of 
the Bhagirathi, which had their different individual designations also. The 
main part of the old city was situated on the eastern bank of the Bhagirathi 
which split up Nabadwip into two groups of ‘Islands’ of which four 
bearing respectively the names of Antardwip, Simantadwip, Godrumadwip 
and Madhyadwip were to the east, and the remaining five, viz. , Koladwip 
(modern town of Nadia), Rtudwip, Jahnudwip, Modadrumadwip and Rudradwip 
were located to the west, of the main channel of the Bhagirathi. These details 
are given clearly in several of the old books and they are supplemented by bits 
of topographical notices of old Nabadwip that have been recorded by later 
writers who treated the subject in pursuance of the traditional description. 

Antardwip, as its name implies, was the central ‘island’, or the heart of the old 
town. Sree Mayapur, the quarter of Nabadwip which contained the house of Sree 
Jagannatha Misra, the father of Sree Chaitanya, was located in the centre 
of, Antardwip. Accordingly, the old chroniclers, in describing Nabadwip, 
always compare it to a full-blown lotus afloat on the stream of the Bhagirathi. 
The eight islands surrounding Antardwip, which is the core of the Lotus, 
are described as forming its eight extended petals. Holy Mayapur, with 
the Yogapeetha or the House of God, is described as the central part of the core. 
The House of God thus forms the central point of an immense circle of which 
the circumference is stated to be thirty-two miles. This is the Circle of the 
Nine Islands. The Circle of Gauda is stated these writers to be 168 miles 
in circumference. 

The Vaishnava authors are tireless in reminding their readers that these place 
appearing to mortal eyes as the divisions of an ordinary tract of land of 
this earth, must never be regarded as the real Nabadwip and Should not 
be reverenced as such. Such reverence would constitute an offense against 
the Abode of the Divinity which is transcendental. They lend no countenance 
to the practice, so prevalent in all parts of the world, of putting the seal and 
label of mundane history, and geography on spiritual sites and occurrences, 
a practice that has been the parent of much misery and of the worst 
superstitions that abound in all the ancient creeds. The Divine cannot be pinned 
down to any place, time or event of this world. There cannot be a greater offense 
against Godhead than to suppose that His Body or anything pertaining to Him 
can at all be of the nature of the things of this world. 

So ‘Nabaddwip’ of Vaishnavas is not a geographical town bearing the name 



situated in the geographical country known to the historians and geographers of 
this world under the name of Gauda. Such a place is not only not Nabadwip but 
if it is ever considered as real Nabadwip, the latter refuses to manifest her proper 
form to the view of an offender who chooses to think in this unspiritual way. 

Real or spiritual Navadwip, real or spiritual Sree Mayapur and real Yogapeetha, 
are open only to the view of the Vaishnavas, or uneclipsed serving souls, and 
whatever they say about the Divine Realm is also, therefore, necessarily true. 
What other people designate as Nabadwip or Sree Mayapur or the Circle of 
Gauda or Bharatavarsha, in as much as it happens to be the mundane view, is 
entitled to no hearing from a Vaishnava and the very notion that the realm of the 
Divinity can possibly be any other than spiritual should be most carefully 
discarded once for all by those who want to understand what the Vaishnavas 
have really to say. 

The reader, who complains that such a procedure will block the way of impartial 
scientific enquiry, would not also be quite reasonable; because it is he who, 
under this unscientific pretext, really, wants to block the way of the only true 
inquiry. What the Vaishnava wants the empiric scientist to admit is that 
he should allow the devotee to deliver the tidings of the Spiritual Realm and not 
to insist on identifying the geography and history of this world with 
the Geography and History of the Spiritual Realm. The empiricist is also 
not entitled to exclude spiritual Geography and History from the account of 
the spiritual events if his purpose really be to represent a thing, as it actually is, 
by available evidence and not as he thinks it ought to be. The two categories 
are quite distinct from one another; and it would be fair to the spiritual subject 
to admit unreservedly its transcendental nature, not merely in theory but 
in practice as well. 

If the career of Sree Chaitanya is written in accordance with the rules laid down 
by empiric biographers, the narrative would be worse than a parody: it would be 
a blasphemy. Such a performance is not the purpose of the writer. His object is to 
faithfully record the events as he finds them in the original sources, offering no 
opinion of his own except only such as help the elucidation of the subject in its 
spiritual sense which is foreign to ordinary mundane experience. This method 
leads to frequent digressions to caution both the writer as well as the readers at 
every step not to misunderstand the subject. These digressions, which are offered 
as the real explanation of the subject, have been gathered from the monumental 
works of the Acharyas, who quote text and verse of the Scriptures to prove by 
scriptural evidence the absolute truth of every word they write and take no credit 



for originality, and in conformity with the personal experience of the 
transcendental teaching and activities the writer’s most revered Gurudeva and 
his associates. 

The geographical site of the Yogapeetha, the Abode of Godhead, passed out of 
the memory of most people due to the misfortune reflected by tradition of havoc 
wrought by the shiftings of the course of the Bhagirathi. The religion taught By 
Sree Chaitanya was not properly grasped by posterity and suffered from 
misrepresentation in the hands of pseudo-teachers who soon abounded 
at Nabadwip and in other parts of the country. There have, indeed, been a 
small number of persons forming the inner following of the Acharyas, in all 
these generations, who have kept up the real tradition. But these have failed to 
win, for the purely spiritual religion up till now, any appreciable measure of 
general The pseudo-Vaishnavas themselves also divided into an increasing 
number of hostile groups, each of which followed a novel inspiration, some of 
them taking to grossly immoral practices which they were not ashamed to give 
out as the religion taught by Sree Chaitanya. The history of these tragic 
occurrence will be told in the concluding chapters of this narrative. The 
preponderance of the pseudo-forms of the religion has, however, secured their 
deserved banishment from the society of the cultured classes, and in 
consequence of this, the real tradition itself has tended to fall into utter neglect 
and is regarded with mistrust even by the orthodox Hindu society at the 
instigation of the Smarta priests. 

The pseudo-cults, that usurped the name of the religion of love, were invaded by 
all those evils of the older atheistical creeds which Sree Chaitanya wishes to put 
down. The descendants of the old associates and followers of Sree Chaitanya set 
themselves up as hereditary teachers of the pseudo-religion which proved to 
them the means of eking out a miserable livelihood by exploitation of the 
credulity of the lowest classes and the most immoral sections of the people. The 
reader may for the present accept this as a moderate statement of the evils that 
have made us forget the teaching of Sree Chaitanya, in order to be able to 
understand why His Religion in course of time ceased to prevail in the upper 
ranks of society and was allowed to be substituted by wretched counterfeits to 
suit the whims and wickedness of designing quacks and knaves who earned their 
living by pandering to the worst vices of the dregs of society claiming exemption 
from even the ordinary salutary checks of communities obeying the rules of the 
old civilization of the country. 



It is this which has made the identification of the old geographical sites a matter 
of hostile interest to the professional Goswamis even of this day and 
their misguided followers. When the old town was being deserted the shrines 
and the holy Forms (Vigrahas) were taken by their migrating proprietors to the 
new sites. And, as the cultured society took little interest in the matter, the old 
sites quickly passed out of the memory of the nation. But with the revival of 
interest in the religion of Sree Chaitanya among the cultured classes within the 
last fifty years or so, there also arose a natural desire to find out the old sites 
connected with Sree Chaitanya. 

Neither has it been really difficult to discover them with the help of the old 
books. The actual site of the home of Sree Jagannath Misra which had 
escaped the general havoc wrought by the Bhagirathi, has been settled on the 
testimony of Vaishnava authors supplemented by the help of the actual 
knowledge of the most revered Vaishnava saints. The process by which the old 
sites have been identified is the same as that by which at the time of Sree 
Chaitanya the holy sites of Sree Brindavan were identified and made known. For 
the proper identification of a spiritual site the testimony of the pure Vaishnavas 
is, spiritually speaking, the one thing needful, as they alone are privileged 
to recognize the site. Geographical and historical considerations by themselves 
are extraneous and can only be ancillary to the spiritual method. 

Sree Mayapurdham, so identified, is situated geographically to the east of the 
river Bhagirathi, nearly opposite the present town of Nadia which is located 
on the western bank of the river identifiable with old Koladwip one of the 
“Nine Islands” forming old Nabadwip. 

The name Antardwip, changed into Atopur (vide Bhakti Ratnakar), persists to 
the present day and includes Sree Mayapur which still maintains its name 
unchanged. The river has constantly shifted its course, up to quite recent times. 
The oldest maps enable us to follow the changes only as far back as 1763 A.D. 
We have to rely exclusively on the testimony of the old writers for avoiding 
mistaken identification that is being attempted by interested parties by availing 
the shiftings of the location of the places during the two hundred and seventy six 
years that elapsed between the Appearance of Sree Chaitanya and the 
publication of Major Rennel’s Atlas. But tradition had always pointed to those 
deserted parts as the site of the old city. Of this fact we possess reliable and 
continuous testimony. 



The method, that appears to us on the whole to be best for the purpose of 
describing the place, is to follow the old writers, taking help of such light as is 
afforded by recent investigations for the purpose of understanding 
their statements. It is not our purpose to enter at this place into the details of 
any recent evidence for which the reader is referred to the investigations of 
Thakur Bhaktivinode which have been summarized in different publications and 
which have formed the basis of subsequent inquiries regarding the real position 
of the old sites. 

Sree Mayapur which has escaped the widespread destruction that was apparently 
caused by sudden changes of the course of he Bhagirathi from a very early 
period is distinguishable from the adjoining lower alluvial plain by its elevation 
and older soil of adhesive clay. A modern village occupying a part of the site of 
Mayapur is inhabited by a number of Muhammedan families who began to settle 
on this old site, which appears in course of time to have been totally deserted, 
from the year 1785. This is traceable 

The actual site of the Yogapeetha, the Home of Sree Jagannatha Misra, was 
identified by the famous saint Chaitanyadas Babaji about eighty years ago 
It appears that the actual site was known as such to the few Vaishnavas who 
cared to he informed about it and had also been visited by them for their 
devotional purposes. The place was noted by the inhabitants of adjoining 
villages for alleged peculiarities. They maintain to this day that the place used to 
be always overgrown with sacred tulasi, for which reason people had 
instinctively desisted from any act of defilement or occupation for the purpose of 
erecting any private dwelling. This reverence towards the site which is displayed 
by the Muhammedan residents in occupation of the adjoining plots, indeed, point 
to a definite conclusion. The row of high mounds, that are now crowned by 
a number of substantial buildings erected by the piety of Vaishnavas since the 
rediscovery of the old sites, had never before been occupied by the villagers 
on their own account who had always regarded with a sort of sacred awe 
those sites which were collectively known as the ‘Vaisnava settlement (Vairagi 
danga). 

There are many current stories of miraculous occurrences connected with the 
sites. But the most startling miracle of all is the fact that the persistent local tales 
are now found to be confirmed in their details by the topographical description 
of. the old writers. For example, we read in the Bhakti Ratnakar that the court¬ 
yard of Sribas Pandit, where Sree Chaitanya inaugurated His own distinctive 



form of worship viz., the congregational Kirtan of Hari and where, in the early 
days of His Preaching, Sree Chaitanya used to chant daily the Kirtan all through 
the nights in the company of His close associates, was situated one hundred 
dhanus (two hundred yards) to the north of the ‘House of God’. A plot of land, 
adjoining the site of the House of Jagannath Misra, finally and definitely 
identified by Sree Jagannath Das Babaji and easily recognizable by the evidence 
of local tradition, still bears the name of ‘khola bhangar danga,' i.e., the mound 
where the ‘khol i.e. mridanga was broken, which event, according to Sree 
Chaitanya Bhagavata, the biography of Sree Chaitanya by a contemporary, took 
place in a locality close to the ‘yard of Sribas’. The site is found to 
have continued to bear this name from the time when the ‘khol’ of the 
offending townsman, who persisted in playing on the mridanga for 
accompanying the chant, was broken by Chand Kazi for arresting the further 
progress of the movement, as described in that work. 

The tomb of Chand Kazi himself, who afterwards turned into a staunch 
supporter of Sree Chaitanya, still exists at a place, the situation of 
which perfectly, tallies with the topography of the books. It has, therefore, 
been possible on the testimony of such excellent corroborative evidence to 
identify many of the old sites and even the actual location of the houses of 
the prominent persons connected with the Activities of Sree Chaitanya in 
old Nabadwip. 

Antardwip which formed the heart of the old straggling city was situated at the 
time of Sree Chaitanya on the eastern bank of the Bhagirathi whose current then 
flowed under the city. The old bank of the river is identifiable with the help of 
the old topography. The following old sites have been traced up until now in the 
above manner—(1) The House of God (Bhagavadgriham), i.e, the Yogapeetha or 
House of Sree Jagannath Misra, father of Sree Chaitanya; (2) the house of 
Sreebas Pandit in whose ‘yard’ the Kirtana was first regularly sung in company; 
(3) the house of Sree Advaitacharya, the meeting-place of the Vaishnavas in the 
early days of the movement; (4) the house of Sree Chandrasekhar Acharya in 
which Sree Chaitanya acted the part of Sree Rukmini in a dramatic performance 
staged by His associates; (5) the tomb of Chand Kazi which is shaded by a 
marvelous champaka tree reputed to be over four hundred years old; (6) the old 
bank of the Bhagirathi marked by its four prominent bathing ghats, viz., ( a) the 
ghat of old Siva, ( b ) Gauranga’s own ghat, (c) Madhai’s ghat, and (d) Barakona 
ghat, all of which possess famous associations; (7) the shrines of old Siva and of 
praura Maya. All these, with the exception of (5) belong to the village that still 



bears the name of Mayapur. 


Close to the tomb of Chand Kazi is the site of Sridhar’s house. The house of 

Chandrasekhar is situated on ‘Ballal’s Tank’ which bears the name of the famous 

independent Hindu king of Bengal, whose successor Lakshmana 

Sena permanently removed the capital from Gauda near Malda to the old town 

of Nabadwip. ‘The Mound ofBallaV situate within a short distance of 

Sree Chaitanya Math is regarded locally as marking the site of the palace of the 

Sena kings which was shunned by all persons after its desecration by the 

first Muhammedan conquerors of Bengal. The residence of Sree 

Nilambar Chakravarti, father of Sree Chaitanya’s mother Sree Sachi Devi, was 

in the quarter of the town where the Kazi lived, which is the same as 

present Bamanpukur (identical with Belpukur of the chroniclers). 

We shall, therefore, follow the order of the sites that was observed by pious 
devotees who performed the circumambulation of the holy Nabadwipdham 
as described by the old writers, in offering a brief account of the surroundings 
of Sree Mayapur that are associated with the early career of Sree Chaitanya. 

Antardwip (literally, the central island), within which Sree Mayapur is situated, 
forms the first of the ‘Nine Islands’ and the starting point of 
the circumambulators. The more famous of the recognizable old sites of 
Antardwip (Atopur) have already been noticed above. 

Simantadwip is the next ‘Island’ that is reached by the pilgrim. Its present name 
is Simulia situated to the north of Sree Mayapur. Sardanga close to 
Simulia contains an old shrine of Sree Jagannathadeva. Sondanga, 
Villvapushkarini, the tract known as megharchar, etc., lie close together. The 
house of Sachi Devi’s father, as already stated, was situated near Belpukur. 

The third of the ‘Islands’ is Godrumadwip (modern Gadigachha) to the south and 
east of Sree Mayapur. Close to it is Suvarna-bihar with very ancient associations. 
Other old places of this locality are Harihara-kshetra, which contains the mounds 
Surya, Brahma, Indra and other gods, and . Devapalli with an old temple of Sree 
Nrisingha. This ‘Island’ contains the bhajan kutir (cottage of devotional practice) 
and samadhi (resting place) of Thakur Bhaktivinode. 

The fourth ‘Island’ is Madhyadwip (Majida) situated to the south of Sree 

Mayapur. It contains the Mounds of the Seven Rishis, a channel bearing the name 



of Gomati, the adjoining wooded tract being known as Naimisharanya, 

Sree Brahmanpuskaras (Baman-paukhera), Uchchahatta ( Hatdanga ) and other 
sites of pious association. 

The fifth of the ‘Islands’ is Koladwip (the modern town of Nadia) to the west- 
south-west of .Sree Mayapur. At the time of Sree Chaitanya Koladwip or Kulia 
was separated from Nadia, the Home of Sree Chaitanya, only by the 
intervening main channel of the Bhagirathi. It is called ‘the place of expiation’ in 
reference to the incidents connected with Gopal-Chapal and Devananda Pandit, 
whose offenses were forgiven by Sree Chaitanya at Kulia. it is sometimes 
designated as ‘the high bank of Kulia,’ and is connected by old writers with very 
ancient events. Close to it is Samudragarh. 

The sixth ‘Island’ is Rtudwip south-west of Koladwip. In it is situated the village 
of Champahati which was formerly a grove of champaka trees. The old shrine 
of Sree Gaur-Gadadhar erected by Dvija Baninath, one of the principal 
associates of Sree Chaitanya, still exists at Champahati. It was also the residence 
of the famous poet Jayadeva of the time of King Lakshmana Sena. 

The seventh ‘Island’ was anciently called Jahnudwip (modern Jahnnagar) to the 
north of Rutdwip. Close to it is Vidyanagar where the Academy of the 
famous Vasudeva Sarbahhauma was situated . 

Modadrumadwip is the eighth ‘Island’ to the north of Jahnudwip. Here is the 
village of Mamgachhi, the birth-place of Thakur Brindabandas, author of 
Sree Chaitanya-Bhagavat, the contemporary, systematic account of the career of 
Sree Chaitanya written in Bengali verse. At Mamgachhi was located the 
paternal residence of Sree Malini Devi, spouse of Sribas Pandit. Close to the 
birthsite of Thakur Brindabandas is the shrine of Sree Madan Gopala installed by 
Sree Vasudeva Datta Thakur, brother of Sree Mukunda Datta Thakur of 
Chattagram, the close associate of Sree Chaitanya. This shrine contains also the 
holy Form (Vigraha) installed by Saranga Murari Thakur, the associate of Sree 
Chaitanya. 

The ninth ‘Island’ is Rudradwip north-east of .Modadrumadwip. 

These ‘Nine Islands’ constitute the Circle of Sridham Nabadwip the 
circumference of which is given as thirty-two miles. 


Sree Mayapur and the adjoining places are at the present day, in their outward 



appearance, very different from the old town of Nabadwip at the time of 
Sree Chaitanya. The present town of Nadia, which is not a very- beautiful 
place except its shrines, is now the only part of the ‘City of the Nine Islands’ that 
bears anything approaching an urban appearance, judged even by the 
modest standard of a Bengal town. The other parts are almost purely rural and 
are mostly overgrown with jungle. The numerous small channels of the 
Bhagirathi, which abound about this point, impart a charming openness to the 
landscape and salubrious freshness to the soft rural breezes that love to haunt the 
silent places of practices of the only absolute pure faith. The main stream of 
the sacred Bhagirathi, which is here swelled to noble proportion by the tribute 
of the great body of sweet and pure water that is poured into it just below 
Sree Mayapur by the Jalangi, forms now, as it did also at the time of Sree 
Chaitanya, the central feature of the countryside. But the main current of the 
Bhagirathi in old time flowed past the landing places of the old populous city. 
The riverside of the old city is partly traceable. The bank was washed away 
probably by a sudden shifting of the course of the river due to a great earthquake 
that fearfully damaged the place in 1515 A.D. shortly after Sree Chaitanya 
had renounced home and family 

But the splendours of the old city lingered long in the memory of the inhabitants. 
Thakur Brindabandas who wrote his Divine Narrative, Sree Chaitanya 
Bhagavat, not long after the disappearance of the Supreme Lord, gives the 
following description of the old town to his contemporaries who could also 
confirm his eulogies. “There was not another town in the world”, says Thakur 
Brindabandas, “like Nabadwip where Sree Chaitanya was born. 

The divine architect must have known beforehand His impending Advent and 
had accordingly lavished with a prodigal hand all his bounty to make of 

Nabadwip the ideal place that it was. Who could describe the opulence of 
Nabadwip? Every single bathing-ghat was thronged by a hundred 
thousand bathers. Each caste resident in Nabadwip had lakhs of members of 
every age. 

All the people were highly skilled in their respective occupations by the grace of 
the goddess of learning. All of them boasted of being masters in their line and 
mere boys contended with the Brahmana teachers in scholastic disputations. 
People from various countries flocked to Nabadwip. One could obtain the real 
taste of learning only by studying at Nabadwip. The great fame of its learning 



drew coundess students who were taught by an incredibly large number of the 
most erudite teachers. This atmosphere of learning was also one of great 
happiness by the kind glance of the goddess of wealth. 

But the spiritual condition of the town, in which we are specially interested, was 
not encouraging. This is what the same competent observer has to say on the 
subject. “The people were blessed with the choicest favours of the goddesses of 
learning and wealth. In these respects they had attained the sunmit of their 
desire. There was only one drawback. The time of all people was wholly wasted 
in the enjoyments of secular pursuits. The world was destitute of devotion for 
Krishna and Rama (Baladeva). At this earliest stage of the Iron Age there came 
to prevail prematurely those worst practices that have been predicted by the 
Scriptures about the far-off future of this Age of Evil. The people sat up whole 
nights at the songs of Mangalchandi (goddess of worldly blessing). This was the 
only practice of religion known to the people. There were a few who in their 
vanity worshipped the goddess Bishahari (healer of poison). Some lavished 
immense wealth on the making of grand idols. Wealth was squandered on the 
marriages of sons and daughters. The time of the people was passed in such 
vanities. The great Chakravartis and Bhattacharyas were wholly unaware of the 
significance of the great Shastras. By their teaching of the Scriptures they earned 
for themselves and their hearers only entanglement in the toils spread by the 
pitiless hand of Death. They never expounded the Divine Dispensation of the 
Age in the shape of the kirtana of Krishna. They spoke only of faults, and never 
of the good qualities, of anyone. There was a great number of arrogant recluses 
and ascetics whose mouths never uttered such a sound as the Names of Hari. 
Those persons, who were most reputed for their piety, used to utter the Names of 
Govinda and Pundarikaksha only at their baths. Even those who professed to 
teach the Geeta and the Bhagavatam, never employed their tongues to the task of 
explaining the principles of devotion to Godhead. No one could be persuaded 
even by entreaty to take the Name of Krishna. Every one harped ad nauseum on 
the merits of learning and social rank. ’ 

There was one notable exception to the above rule. ‘Sree Advaita Acharya who 
lived at Nadia was most highly respected for his unrivaled learning, his 
high birth and honoured position in society. He was an eminent professor of 
the Scriptures and excelled in expounding the true spiritual practice and 
principle. He was equal to the great Sankara (Siva) himself in expounding the 
subject of devotion to Krishna. He was equally well versed in all branches of 
the Scriptures; and, in teaching them, he was always careful to explain 



that devotion to the Feet of Krishna was the essence of all the Scriptures. He 
was always engaged in worshipping Krishna with the greatest ardour, in 
the simplest and purest manner, by the offering of sprays of the holy tulasi, 
dearly loved of Krishna, steeped in the sacred water of the Ganges. He often 
gave vent to deep ejaculations of sorrow , resembling the rumbling of thunder 
and impregnated with the fiery energy of Krishna, which, passing beyond the 
limits of this universe, reverberated in the Holy Realm of Vaikuntha. 

Sree Advaita Acharya was the leader of a small band of sincere devotees who 
were at this time settled in Nabadwip. These Vaishnavas were opposed 
by atheists, specially on account of their practice of frequently uttering the 
Name of Hari with a loud voice. This practice together with their theistic views 
was sufficient to mark them out as the legitimate objects of their invectives 
and ridicule, from which they could not be effectively shielded even by the 
great influence of Sree Advaita Acharya himself who was regarded with respect 
and awe all over Nadia. 

The reason for such hostility were many: the foremost being that the Vaishnavas 
eschewed all worldly pleasures and enjoyments, which was regarded as a 
deprecation of the life of epicurean ease that was fashionable in all ranks of the 
then society. There was no want of aggressive epicureans in that Age also who 
openly condemned all pretensions to a life that was in every way above 
animality. They wrote scurrilous ballads against the Vaishnavas and sang them in 
the streets. The ascetic, the chaste woman, no less than others,’ so ran these 
effusions, ‘will go the way of all the flesh. He alone can be said to have done 
good deeds in his previous birth who rides the dola and the horse and is preceded 
and followed by scores of running footmen. Much as your Holiness cries in the 
mood of devotion, yet it does not cancel your Holiness's sorrows of poverty. 

Your Holiness never ceases to call upon the Name of Hari with a very loud 
voice. It may surely anger the Lord to be addressed by shouts.’ The frank realism 
of these fifteenth century Bengali followers of Charvaka cannot be outdone by 
their most up-to-date successors of the present day. This was almost the general 
attitude of the citizens of a profligate town devoid of all taste for anything higher 
than bodily enjoyments of a refined character engendered by their engrossing 
secular studies and urban pursuits. 

There was another class of objectors who also ridiculed the mode of kirtana with 
a loud voice. The ground for their objection was, however, different from that of 
the refined epicureans. ‘I myself,’ such were the ideas of these people, 



‘am the Brahman Who is devoid of all the qualities. Why then do they make any 
such distinction as that between servant and Master?’ These men were the 
worst enemies of the Vaishnavas. There were also many persons who looked 
upon the Vaishnavas as designing worldly people who took to begging to earn 
their livelihood by that easy method, for sheer idleness. 

We frequently hear the complaint that religion suffers degradation by scarcity of 
people who really lead the religious life. It is supposed that if religion is 
freed from the clutches of these people who have so long monopolized it for 
their profit and pleasure and have degraded it by their foul lives, people in 
general would voluntarily follow the lead of truly devout persons. If only the 
preachers of religion, say these open atheists, lead truly spiritual lives 
themselves, their example would prove irresistible in winning everybody to 
spiritual living. But the opposite of this is what almost invariably happens in this 
world. The sincere devotees are always ridiculed and persecuted by the people. 
This is also exactly as was likely in the circumstances. Those who are steeped 
in worldliness have a spontaneous dislike for persons who openly 
profess principles and follow a mode of life that are in essential contradiction to 
theirs. The conduct of the devotees is always regarded by worldly people, who 
have no inclination for listening to the unpalatable truth, as both foolish 
and mischievous. Therefore, instead of following the example of such persons 
the worldlings always look upon the pure souls as enemies of every 
useful institution and set themselves in vindictive opposition to their activities. 
To what ferocious persecution the bona fide Vaishnavas have been subjected at 
the hands of their opponents from time to time, is not sufficiently well 
known, although it forms the most pathetic and the most shameful chapter of 
the history of India. Sree Chaitanya says, “It is our only duty always to chant 
the kirtana of Hari with humility greater than that of the blade of grass, 
with greater endurance than that of the tree, giving all due honour to others 
without desiring any honour for ourselves.” But nothing can make amends, in 
the eyes of worldly people, for the crime of chanting the Name of Hari or 
proclaiming the unvarnished Truth in and out of season and at all time with 
body, mind and speech as required by the teaching of all the Scripture embodied 
in the institution of the whole-time kirtana of the Absolute. 

We have already described in a preceding chapter the state of religious opinion 
in the country of the time of Sree Chaitanya. There was no lack of 
unspiritual doctrines and practices upheld by ancient philosophical systems most 
of which were mere apologies, or even justifications, of the ordinary ungodly 



practices of the misguided jivas of this world. The system that was in most 
vogue among the Pandits of Nabadwip at this period and has been fashionable 
ever since, is the atheistical system of Nabya Nyaya. The other atheistical 
systems of philosophy were also assiduously taught in the schools of Nabadwip. 
We learn that scholars even from Mithila (Tirhoot) came to Nabadwip to study 
the New Logic. Sannyasins and learned Professors from Benares and all parts of 
North India came to Nabadwip for the study of Vedanta. We also read of 
students coming to Nabadwip even from distant Kanchi and the southernmost 
part of the country. 

These materialistic studies had acquired such preponderance at that period that 
scholarship and ungodliness came to be regarded as necessarily identical. 

The masses sang the songs of Mangalchandi and considered the endeavour 
for increasing the means of worldly enjoyment as the ideal of religion. 

The common people, and especially the wealthy trading communities, 
performed with great eclat the worship of Mangalchandi and, by subsidizing the 
Brahmana Pandits with liberal pecuniary gifts, were enabled to buy their 
subservient approval of those unscriptural practices. Much money was 
recklessly squandered on the short-lived idols and no less on the exhibition of 
pantomime dolls, which was an invariable and costly item of expense on all 
festive occasions. There were very few permanent Holy Vigrahas in Bengal at 
that time. The worship of the permanent Holy Vigraha became a tradition in 
Bengal only subsequent to the Advent of Sree Chaitanya and as the effect of His 
Teachings. Temporary images were the only objects of worship. Those images 
were immersed in water after the festivity in their honour was concluded, on 
the wrong assumption that the Form of Godhead is a material and 
temporary entity. 

This posture of affairs filled the devotees with grief and despair. No one served 
Godhead, no one ever talked about Him, or took His Holy Name, or could 
be persuaded to listen to any discourse about Him. This was the blighted 
waste glutted with every form of luxury aggravated by the strenuous pursuit 
of worldly knowledge, which evoked the tenderest solicitude, of that small 
band of pure souls and impelled them to adopt every method that could be 
devised for rousing the deluded people to a sense of their eternal duty and 
thereby saving them from their impending terrible doom. But all their efforts for 
the amelioration of the spiritual condition of the people were misunderstood 
and responded to by the bitterest invectives, ridicule and cruel persecution! 

Yet those servants of Godhead did not lose their faith nor relax their 



efforts, although their very food did not taste in their mouths at the sight of 
the miseries of their kindred. The Bhagavatas applied themselves to their 
devotions in the forms of the worship of Krishna, discourse about Krishna, and 
bathing in the holy stream of the Ganges. And all of them incessantly blessed the 
world, 'May Krishna soon bestow His mercy on all!’ 



Chapter 2 Family and Elders 

The Advent of Sree Chaitanya was preceded by the appearance of a numerous 
body of pure devotees in different parts of the country who joined Him 
at Nabadwip in due course and became incorporated in His Activities. This 
galaxy of the stars of the first magnitude occupies the foreground of the picture 
that it is our purpose to offer. Sree Chaitanya is unintelligible without 
intimate knowledge of the doings of His associates. He is expressed in the 
only intelligible form in the lives of His associates. He is expressed in the 
only intelligible form in the lives of His bona fide devotees. These devotees were 
not so many imitators of Sree Chaitanya. Each of them has a great, living, 
individual personality; each serves Sree Chaitanya in his own way and helps 
to demonstrate the quality of unbounded catholicity and endless variety 
of manifestation in individual personalities of our only eternal function. 

The conduct of these devotees is even more instructive than the 
Transcendental Activities of Sree Chaitanya Himself Whom it was the function 
of these great souls to express by serving the Absolute Truth identical with the 
Personality of Sree Chaitanya under every form of circumstance and every 
manner of disposition, by the method of incorporated, subordinate service. 

The Vaishnava authors always offer the esoteric view of those events. When 
Godhead Himself comes down into this world, He does not come un-attended by 
His eternal associates and Divine paraphernalia. They accompany Him to this 
world. The transcendental realm of the ‘White Island’ is the Eternal 
Divine Abode of Sree Chaitanya Who is identical with Sree Krishna and 
presents the Divinity’s Own Benevolent Nature dominating over all other Divine 
Qualities. 

The Lord Sree Krishna-Chaitanya dwells in the White Island, as does 
Krishnachandra in Braja, with all His elders, kindred, associates and 
complete entourage. When Sree Chaitanya deigns to come down into this world, 
He comes in His Fullness, with all His elders, associates, servitors and realm. 

His advent is, therefore, preceded by the appearance of His elders. All these are 
a part and parcel of Himself and are in fact the extension of His own Divine Self. 

It is by their reciprocal means that the Lord manifests His own Full Personality. 
What the Lord is in His supermanifest Nature cannot and need not be known to 
any one except Himself. Others need know the Lord only to the fullest 



extent and in the fullest manner in which He chooses to manifest Himself to 
them individually. By the manifestation of Godhead to the individual soul, the 
later is fully satisfied and, as a matter of fact, such an individual does not desire, 
nor does he think it necessary to know anything more, not merely for the 
time being but for all time. 

The jiva to whom Godhead reveals Himself sees the same Divine manifestation 
everywhere and always, in His infinity of aspects. His cherished Divinity is 
to him verily an endless Ocean of perfect and exquisite bliss, free from 
every species of unwholesomeness, imperatively requiring his perennial 
loving service by His perpetual manifestations. The appearance of the Lord is for 
the purpose of making His devotees happy by affording them the Sight of 
Himself. The establishment of religion and the destruction of demons who 
appear as the enemies of Godhead do not require the Personal Appearance of 
Supreme Godhead Sree Krishna Himself. These functions can be, and as a 
matter of fact are ordinarily, performed by the Vishnu Avataras, or sometimes 
even by the favoured among the pure jivas, by His command. The establishment 
of the samkirtana of Krishna, which is the Divine Dispensation of this Kali Age, 
is effected by the Avatara for the Age, and it would not be necessary for 
Godhead to come down into this world for this purpose alone. 

But there is a function which cannot be delegated, viz., that of pleasing the 
devotees. Love for Himself can neither be conferred nor be satisfied by 
anything short of Himself. It was for the purpose of bestowing, on fallen jivas, 
love for Himself in the perfect form that is found only in Goloka, that Sree 
Krishna, wearing the devotional mood and grace of Sree Radhika, appeared in 
this world in His Eternal Identical Form of Sree Krishna Chaitanya, with all His 
associates, elders and servitors eternally manifest in the ‘White Island’, the 
realm of Krishna’s boundless and causeless Mercy. 

In Braja Sree Radhika sets the model for the highest service of Krishna. In the 
‘White Island’ it is Sree Krishna Himself who performs the function of 
teaching all individual souls how Sree Radhika serves Sree Krishna in Braja, by 
putting on Sree Radhika ‘s grace and devotion in order to enable Himself to 
serve Sree Krishna after the manner of Sree Radhika in Her highest Mood, viz., 
during Her separation from Sree Krishna. The service that is rendered by Sree 
Radhika manifests itself in this world in Braja at the close of the Dvapara Age. 
But in its direct manifestation it is not at all understood by mortals. It is only the 
Lord Himself Who can bestow this perfect loving devotion to Himself even on 



souls that are averse to Him on principle and thereby enable them to realize the 
true meaning of such pure devotion. 

This explanation of the real purpose of the advent of Sree Chaitanya is fully 
corroborated by the Scriptures and by the Activities of Sree Chaitanya 
Himself. When godhead Himself appears in this world, all His secondary 
Manifestations automatically merge in Him. It was in this wise that there were 
born among men, by the command of Godhead, in advance of His own 
Appearance, the kindreds, associates and servitors of the Lord. 

Sree Ananta, Siva, Brahma, the Rishis and all the relations and associates of 
every divine Avatar a were born and their prototypes, some of them appeared 
in Nabadwip, some inChattagram, Srihatta, some were born in Rahr, in Odra, 
and the West, the devotees descending into this world from their 
transcendental realm appeared in various places, and, coming up subsequently to 
Nabadwip, were there joined together around the Person of the Lord. All the 
Vaishnavas were born in Nabadwip, except a few who appeared elsewhere. 

The Elders who were first to appear were Sree Sachi, Sree Jagannath, Sree 
Madhabendra Puri, Sree Keshava Bharati, Sree Isvara Puri, Sree 
Advaita Acharya, Sree Pundarik Vidyanidhi, Sree Thakur Haridas, Sree Upendra 
Misra, father of Sree Jagannath Misra, with his seven sons, Sree Nilambar 
Chakravarti, father of Sree Sachi Devi, Sree Sree Prabhu Nityananda, Sree 
Gangadas Pandit, Sree Murari Gupta, Sree Mukunda and others. 

Our records show that a certain Brahmana of Western India, bearing the name of 
Sree Madhukar Misra, a devotee of Sree Sree Narayana, for some 
unknown reason, came to Sylhet and settled there. Sree Upendra Misra was the 
second son of Sree Madhukar Misra. Sree Upendra Misra was a Vaishnava, a 
great scholar, wealthy and possessed of an abundance of good qualities. Sree 
Upendra Misra was the father of seven sons,—(1) Kamsari, (2) Paramananda, 

(3) Jagannath, (4) Sarbeswar, (5) Padmanabh, (6) Janardan, and (7) 

Trilokanath. Sree Jagannath Misra, one of the seven sons of Sree Upendra Misra, 
migrated from Sylhet to Nabadwip, the emporium of all learning of the Age. The 
title of Sree Jagannath Misra, earned by his shastric scholarship, was Purandara. 

At Nabadwip Sree Purandara Misra espoused Sree Sachi Devi, the eldest 
daughter of Sree Nilambar Chakravarti. With the intention of dwelling in 
the neighbourhood of the sacred stream of the Bhagirathi, that has issued from 



the Feet of Vishnu, in the company of high-born Sree Sachi Devi, who was 
the embodiment of devotion to Vishnu, pure-hearted magnanimous 
Purandara Misra settled in Sree Mayapur in the central ‘Island’ of the City of 
Nine Islands. Sree Chandrasekhar Acharya was the maternal uncle(mother’s 
sister’s husband) of Sree Chaitanya. Sree Murari Gupta, the author of Sree 
Chaitanya Charit, belonging to a Vaidya family of Sylhet, had migrated to 
Nabadwip. He was senior in years to Sree Chaitanya. Sree Pundarik Vidyanidhi, 
also known as ‘Premanidhi, and ‘Acharyanidhi,, had his paternal home in the 
village of Mekhala about fourteen miles to the north of the town of Chittagong, 
where his sacred ‘seat’ still exists. His partner’s name was Ratnavati. His father 
was Vaneswar (or Suklambar) Bhatta and his mother’s name was Ganga Devi. 

He was the disciple of Sree Madhabendra Puri and was himself accepted as 
his Guru by Sree Gadadhar Pandit Goswami. Sree Chaitanya called 
Pundarik Vidyanidhi ‘father’ and bestowed on him the name of ‘Premanidhi’ 
indicative of servitorship of Godhead. Sribas and his younger brother Sree Rama 
left their home at Sree Mayapur and removed to Kumarhatta after Sree 
Chaitanya’s renunciation of the world. 

Sree Nityananda Prabhu, the Associated Facsimile of Sree Chaitanya, made His 
appearance in the village of Ekchakra in the country of Rahr, not far 
from Mollarpur station of the E.I. Railway, within the modern district of 
Birbhum. Hadai Pandit or Hadai Ojha, the father of Nityananda, was a good 
Brahmana from Mithila, resembling Vasudeva in the immaculate purity of his 
nature. The name of the wife of Hadai Pandit was Padmavati. Nityananda made 
His appearance in this world on the tithi which is ever hallowed by His birth, 
that corresponds to the thirteenth day of the bright fortnight of the month of 
Magh. As a child, Nityananda startled all the neighbours by being constantly 
occupied in the company of His associates in rehearsing the events of the 
Avataras of Vishnu. The details of these childish pastime have been reverentially 
preserved. Their nature may be briefly indicated. 

He made His playmates form themselves into the assembly of gods. One of the 
boys, representing the Earth, having complained to it of her 
unbearable sufferings under the crushing weight of iniquities, those children who 
acted as members of the assembly of gods repaired to the bank of the adjoining 
river and there prayed to the Lord Who rests in the Ocean of Milk. One of the 
boys, hid behind the tree, gives this reply of Godhead to their prayer, ‘I will soon 
be born in the Home of Vasudeva at Mathura’. Sometimes personating the 
Divine Avatara of the Dwarf, Nityananda affected to deliver Bali. On another 



occasion He would fall into a swoon acting the part of Lakshmana in the Leela 
of Godhead’s Avatara as Sree Ramachandra hit by the powerful dart of 
Indrajit. Then one of the boys, acting the part of Hanuman, hastened to procure 
the required curative herb from the Gandhamadana Mount and by that 
means effected His recovery. Such pastimes of the little Boy amazed all 
beholders who could not account for this extraordinary conduct of the little 
Child. Twelve years were passed in these pleasant activities under the roof of His 
parents. 

Nityananda set out on His long travel to all places of pilgrimage at the age of 
twelve. The incident that immediately led to this long pilgrimage is thus 
stated. A certain sannyasin became a chance-guest at the house of Hadai Pandit. 
He begged of Hadai Pandit to give Nityananda to him; and, in order not 
to transgress against the rule laid down by the Shastras, Hadai Pandit 
found himself obliged, against his own wish, to hand to the sannyasin the 
Darling of his heart Who was much more to him than even his own life. The 
grief of the parents, in being thus parted for good from their Child of twelve, 
knew no bounds. The nature of the renunciation of the world for the sake of 
Godhead must on no account be confounded with renunciation for any other 
purpose, which latter is an unpardonable and clear dereliction of one’s duty. 

The renunciation exhibited by Godhead and His devotees redounds to the good 
of the whole world, and, most of all, of those very persons who appear, to 
the superficial observer, to be the greatest sufferers by their abandonment. 

Lord Nityananda, after thus leaving His parental home, traveled to all the tirthas. 
in company of the sannyasin, till the twentieth year of His age. The places He 
thus visited include Bakreswar, Vaidyanath, Gaya, Kasi, Prayag, Mathura, 
Brindabana, Hastinapur, Dwaraka, Siddhapura, Matsyatirtha, Siva-Kanchi, 
Vishnu-Kanchi, Kurukshetra, Bindu Sarobar, Pravaasa, Sudarsantirtha, Tritakup, 
Vishala, Brahmatirtha, Chakratirtha, Prati-Srota, Naimisharanya, Ayodhya, 
Sringaharpur, Kausiki, Pulastasrama, Gomati, Gandaki, Mahendra-giri, 

Haridwar, Godavari, Benvatirtha, Sree Parbata, Sree Ranganatha, Hari-kshetra, 
Rishabha-Parbata, Kritamala, Madura, Tamraparni, Malay- 
aparbata, Badarikasrama, Gokarna, Surparaka, Kanyakanagara, Nirbindha and 
all the countless holy sites. He journeyed to all those places in order to sanctify 
them by His visit. 

At the conclusion of this long pilgrimage Nityananda enacted the Leela of 
obtaining the only reward of pilgrimage in the shape of attainment of 



the privilege of the companionship of the true devotee, in as much as He 
now Joined Sree Madhabendra Puri, ‘the first shoot of the Purpose Tree of 
Loving Devotion ’ from whom He accepted His initiation into spiritual life (or, 
according to some, He accepted His initiation from Sree Lakshmipati, the Guru 
of Sree Madhabendra Puri). The meeting with His Guru is thus described by 
Sree Ghanasyam Thakur, the writer of Bhakti Ratnakar: 'Lakshmipati, so 
famous in the school of Madhya, the owner of all good qualities, most dear to 
the Lord of Sree Lakshmi Devi, partook of his meal obtained by begging, 
interspersed with Krishna-talk, at the house of that Brahmana. Nityananda in the 
Form of BalaRama showed Himself to Lakshmipati under the guise of a dream: 
‘A certain Brahmana boy has come to this village in the garb of a super-ascetic; 
He will be your disciple; make Him your disciple by means of this mantram, 
and He spoke the mantram into his ear.’ Nityananda on meeting him repeatedly 
said to the sanyasin: ‘Do thou deliver Me by initiation by the mantram. ’ 

After initiation Nityananda was given the Brahmachari’s name of ‘Svarup’ and 
has accordingly been sometimes called ‘Nityananda-Svarup 5 both by 
Sree Brindabandas Thakur as well as by Srila Kaviraj Goswami. Sree 
Nityananda subsequently made His way to Nabadwip where He joined Sree 
Chaitanya. 

Thakur Haridas made his appearance in this world in about the year 1451 A.D. 
(1372 Sh.), thirty-five years before the Advent of Sree Chaitanya, in the 
village of Budhan in the district of Jessore. He came of a Muhammedan family 
and in some manner, of which we do not possess any trustworthy record, 
obtained very early in life the mercy of a Vaishnava who initiated him into the 
religion of all souls. He, thereupon, left his parent’s house and his kin, and came 
to Benapole where he made a small hut and lived therein. His method of 
worship consisted in repeating, constantly and with a loud voice, the holy maha- 
mantram of the sixteen Names of Godhead. He recited the maha-mantram 
three lakhs of times every day. For this purpose he cut himself off completely 
from every form of worldly association. It was not long, however, before his 
practice found a malicious opponent in a local landholder of a most villainous 
character, of the name of Ramachandra Khan. Ramachandra Khan was as foolish 
as he was wicked and was incited to adopt the infamous method, described 
below, by the representations of a fanatical section of the Hindu residents of the 
locality who felt themselves scandalized by a Muhammedan presuming to adopt 
their language in taking the name of Godhead in the manner that could pierce 
even the ear-holes of such a great personage as Ramachandra Khan ! ! 



Ramachandra Khan did not believe that a person in the full bloom of early youth 
could have really no attachment for woman. He accordingly deputed a shameless 
harlot of great beauty, whom he subsidised for the purpose, to employ her 
seductive arts to compass the ruin of the young devotee. 

This abandoned woman continued to offer herself regularly at the solitary hut of 
devotion of Thakur Haridas for three successive nights. She was kept waiting for 
the whole night by Thakur Haridas by the assurance that he would attend to her 
request after the utterance of the quota of the Names that he was 
under obligation to take daily, was completed. Towards the close of the third 
night that harlot, whose mind had been completely changed by listening to the 
Holy Name of Godhead from the lips of the great saint who was so 
completely unmindful of those irresistible charms of a young woman that are the 
cause of ruin of so many so-called Rishis of all ages and conditions, fell 
prostrate at the feet of Thakur Haridas and, with a contrite and chastened heart, 
implored him to enable her to worship Godhead in the pure manner that he 
himself did. The woman opened her heart frankly to Thakur Haridas and told 
him all about the infernal conspiracy and also of her own past life which had 
been utterly sinful. Haridas said to her that she was fit to take the Holy Name of 
Godhead, and he accordingly initiated her into the life of the pure service of 
Krishna. Haridas then advised her to give away all her treasure to the pious 
Brahmanas and devote herself to the worship of Krishna by constantly uttering 
His Name living apart from all other people in the solitary hut which he had built 
for his own worship. Thereupon, bestowing his own hut on that woman, Thakur 
Haridas left Benapole for good. That harlot became thenceforward a most 
renowned devotee of Krishna. 

From Benapole Thakur Haridas proceeded to Chandpur eastward of Saptagrama, 
the residence of the father of the future Raghunathdas Goswami who was at this 
time a little boy. The name of Raghunath’s father was Gobardhan Mazumdar. 
Hiranya was the elder brother of Gobardhan. They were employed under Sultan 
Hussain Shah to collect the revenues of Saptagrama, which totaled twenty lakhs 
of rupees of which twelve had to be remitted to the Royal Treasury, the 
collectors being entitled to retain for themselves the balance of eight lakhs. They 
were consequently among the richest persons of that time. Thakur Haridas put 
up with Balaram Acharya of Chandpur who was the priest of Hiranya and 
Gobardhan. The boy Raghunath Das frequently visited Thakur Haridas. This was 
the cause of his obtaining the mercy of Sree Chaitanya later on. 



At the request of Balaram Acharya, Thakur Haridas once presented himself at 
the gathering of Brahmanas in the halls of Hiranya and Gobardhan who 
were patrons of Brahmanas and pious persons. The Thakur was well received by 
both brothers. Presently, evidently in view of the practice of the Thakur, 
the assembly began to praise the taking of the Holy Name, some maintaining 
that the Name destroys sin, others contending that the Name confers 
deliverance from the bondage of the world. Thakur Haridas said that those 
secondary results are effected by the dim reflection of the Name. The effect of 
the Name Himself is to arouse love to the Feet of Krishna. Emancipation is the 
trivial effect of the dim reflection of the Name. 

A Brahmana by the name of Gopal Chakravarti, who was employed by Hiranya 
Mazumdar in connection with the remittance of revenues to Gauda and 
who happened to be present, felt greatly chagrined to hear these statements 
of Thakur Haridas and asked the assembly not to be led away by the 
ridiculous effusions of an impostor, acting the part of a sadhu to deceive ignorant 
people, by endorsing the view that emancipation, which is not attainable in 
crores of births on the path of knowledge of the Brahman, is gained by the mere 
dim glow of the Name. This, he said, was impossible and intolerable. 

When Thakur Haridas, with great calmness, quoted the Scriptures to show that 
emancipation, resulting from the dim glow of the Name, is trivial and is 
not accepted by devotees even when it becomes available to them, the 
Brahmana’s anger was so much inflamed by this exhibition of firmness that he 
shouted to Thakur Haridas that if he failed to prove from the Scriptures that 
emancipation results from the dim glow of the Name, was he prepared to have 
his nose cut off? The Thakur intimated his readiness to submit to the bet 
proposed, whereupon all the assembled people and especially Balaram Acharya 
strongly condemned the outrageous conduct of Gopal, and all of them, 
including Hiranya and Gobardhan, begged the forgiveness of the Thakur for the 
insult that had been openly offered to him in their presence. Thakur Haridas 
observed that Gopal’s anger was due to his ignorance of the Scriptures and he 
was, therefore, not to blame; and saying this, he left the place, resuming the 
loud chant of the Name of Krishna. It is recorded that for this offense 
Gopal Chakravarti was afflicted with the worst form of leprosy in the course of 
three days and his nose fell off in consequence, and that although the Thakur 
so readily forgave him, his offense was not pardoned by Godhead. 


From Chandpur Thakur Haridas made his way to Santipur and presented himself 



at the house of Sree Advaita Acharya. The latter was very much encouraged by 
the appearance of Haridas and provided him with a suitable place for his 
devotional practices by finding out a cave in a retired part of the bank of the 
Ganges. 

Thakur Haridas lived in this cell and had his daily meal at the house of Advaita 
with whom he could talk about Krishna. Haridas expressed his fear that 
the conduct of Advaita in feeding him daily with the most unreserved 
hospitality might bring social troubles to him, he being a Muhammedan by birth. 
Sree Advaita Acharya, in answer to this, formally offered to Thakur Haridas the 
meal cooked for the occasion of the anniversary of the sradha ceremony of 
his departed father, that had to be given to the Brahmanas according to 
custom, with the remark that ‘by feeding you, crores of Brahmanas are truly 
fed’. 

It is said that the Thakur Haridas was tempted a second time by a woman while 
he was staying at the cave at Santipur, and that this time the woman was no 
less than Maya herself, the deluding power of Godhead, whose solicitation, 
which no jiva, from Brahma downwards, can resist, produced on Haridas the 
only effect of increasing still further his ardent devotion to the Feet of 
Krishna. Mayadevi sought and obtained the gift of the Name of Krishna from 
Thakur Haridas in lieu of her effort to test the sincerity of the devotion of 
Haridas. 

From Santipur Thakur Haridas made his way to the village of Fulia which was 
the residence of a strong community of Brahmanas. Fulia is situated three miles 
to the east of Santipur. Thakur Haridas lived here in a cell on the bank of the 
Bhagirathi as at Santipur and chanted aloud the maha-mantram of 
sixteen Names of godhead three lakhs of times every day. The Muhammedans 
who lived in the neighbourhood were incited by the Brahmanas of Fulia 
to complain to the Kazi about the behaviour of Haridas, which, they pointed 
out, was bound to produce a most undesirable effect on the prestige of 
the Muhammedan community and religion. 

The Kazi took this seriously and had Haridas brought to the presence of the 
Governor for trial. He was at first treated with great respect and allowed to 
visit the prison as he desired to converse with the prisoners. The prisoners, who 
did not expect in their midst a saint who was treated with respect by the 
keepers, thought he might obtain their release from captivity. They accordingly 



pressed round him and begged him to intercede with the Governor for their 
liberation. The Thakur in reply congratulated them on their captivity and wished 
that their state of bondage might be prolonged. This filled the prisoners with 
dismay. Haridas hastened to remove their mistake by explaining what he meant. 
He said that they were forcibly kept away from the pursuit of worldly objects in 
their state of captivity. This gave them a respite for the worship of Godhead. 
Because Godhead cannot be worshipped when one’s mind is engrossed in the 
affairs of this world. They should avail themselves of this opportunity, so 
mercifully placed in their way, of turning their thoughts to Godhead; so that, 
having acquired the taste for such life, even after they were set free, they 
might continue to serve Godhead in the midst of the various temptations of the 
world. He did not really desire the prolongation of their state of captivity in 
the ordinary sense. 

When Thakur Haridas was produced before the Governor for his trial, he was 
offered a good seat in the court and the Governor pleaded, with 
every appearance of sincere good will, that he should revert to his own society, 
its customs and religion. Thakur Haridas replied: ‘A man follows the path 
that appears to him to be the best. This is the dispensation of Providence. 

Under this law a man born in a high Brahmana family sometimes embraces 
the Muhammedan religion. And although he was born in a Muhammedan 
family, God has been merciful to him and has shown him the path of the highest 
good. This path he intends to follow. If such conduct appears to the Governor to 
be deserving of punishment, he is prepared to undergo any consequences that 
it may involve.’ 

The Governor then began to revile Vishnu and threatened to punish Thakur 
Haridas with severe whipping till he would be forced to give up the 
heinous course. Thakur Haridas simply replied: 'Even if he is actually cut to 
pieces he would never for a moment cease to utter the Name of Hari with his 
mouth.’ 

The Governor, at the instance of the Kazi, now carried out his threat by ordering 
Thakur Haridas to be whipped in twenty-two market-places of amua Mulk. This 
barbarous order was duly executed. When Thakur Haridas appeared to be dead, 
the ruffians who had been employed to cudgel him, tried to throw his body into 
the Ganges. It is said that they failed to lift the body with all their efforts. This 
frightened the Governor and his aiders and abettors in this horrible sin. 



The Governor now spoke kind words to Haridas. He was convinced that Haridas 
was a real Pir (holy man) and not a cheat as he had taken him to be. He was 
sorry for what he had done and even begged his forgiveness. He then ordered his 
men to liberate Haridas and assured him of immunity from all further 
molestation on his part, desiring him to do as he liked. Thakur Haridas returned 
to his cell at Fulia, undaunted by this terrible proof of the 
implacable vindictiveness of his opponents. 

On another day a snake-charmer was giving a display of his art at the house of a 
wealthy resident of Fulia to the accompaniment of dance and music. 

Thakur Haridas happened to arrive on the spot and taking his stand on one 
side watched the performance which was a representation of a Feat of Sree 
Krishna, viz., the quelling of the serpent Kaliya. 

Overpowered by the associations awakened in him by the sacred theme, Thakur 
Haridas fainted away, and, when he was helped to regain his 
consciousness, himself joined in the dance, exhibiting all the external signs of 
the eight satvika perturbations. The snake-charmer stopped his performance, 
and, with palms joined in the attitude of reverence standing motionless on one 
side, gazed with awe on the devotional activities of Thakur. This mood of 
Haridas was, however, soon over; and, after he had stopped, the snake-charmer 
resumed his musical performance. Those present were so moved by the 
occurrence that they devoutly took the dust of the feet of Thakur. 

A Brahmana, who happened to be in the crowd and had watched the whole 
affair, thought of acquiring a cheap reputation for sanctity by imitating 
the satvika perturbations of Haridas that he had witnessed. He accordingly 
affected to swoon away and forthwith began to sing, dance, laugh and shiver, 
in imitation of Thakur Haridas. 

The snake-charmer now behaved in a most strange manner. He, who had been so 
quiet and respectful towards Thakur Haridas, suddenly fell upon the unlucky 
Brahmana with great fury and began to belabor him, with a cudgel that he 
snatched from one of his men, in a most merciless fashion. That 
Brahmana, unable to bear the severe thrashing, took to his heels in a very short 
time. On being asked by the spectators the reason of his strange and violent 
conduct towards the Brahmana, the snake-charmer replied that he had beat 
the Brahmana, because by his hypocritical exhibitions he was trying to bring 
into contempt the conduct of the revered Thakur Haridas. 



Another Brahmana of Fulia opposed the practice of chanting loudly the Name of 
Hari by Haridas on the ground that it was against the Scriptures. He denied that 
Haridas, who was born of a Muhammedan family, had any right to dabble in the 
philosophy and religion of the Hindus; that this very fact of a Muhammedan 
posing as a teacher of the Scriptures of the Hindus, portended the appearance, 
long before its appointed time, of the worst period of the Age of evil. This 
impostor has the effrontery of procuring the best food by begging from door to 
door, presuming to teach the Shastras to respectable people! If his explanation 
regarding chanting of the Name of Hari with a loud voice, is not found in the 
Scriptures, his nose ought to be cut off., Accosted by the infuriated Brahmana in 
the above fashion Thakur Haridas with a smile left the place to chant loudly the 
Name of Hari. That Brahmana also met with the condign punishment of his 
offense by being smitten with the small-pox in the course of a few days, that cost 
him his nose. 

Thakur Haridas now made his way to Nabadwip and there joined the 
congregation of the small group of Vaishnavas that was gradually forming round 
the figures of Sree Advaita acharya, who had settled there as a teacher with his 
own Academy (tol) and Sribas Pandit who lived close to the Academy of Sree 
Advaita Acharya. At this time Thakur Haridas constantly traveled to different 
parts of the country with the object of preaching the kirtana of Hari to the 
people. Shortly after his arrival at Nabadwip, he joined Sree Chaitanya as one of 
His most devoted associates. 

Sree Advaita Acharya, who was the acknowledged leader of the small Vaishnava 
community of Nabadwip at the time of the Appearance of Sree Chaitanya, was 
a person of vast erudition, possessed of great wealth and occupied a position 
of the highest respect in the society of Nabadwip. He appears to have 
been originally a native of the village of Nabagram in some as yet unidentified 
part of Bengal. He subsequently settled at Santipur, whither he had come in 
course of a pilgrimage that he had undertaken after the departure of his parents 
from this world. At Santipur he married Sree Sita Devi. Sree Advaita Acharya 
met Thakur Haridas for the first time at Santipur where he offered him the meal 
on the occasion of the annual funeral ceremony of his departed father, instead 
of giving the same to the Brahmanas by seminal birth as is the custom of 
the smartas. 


Advaita built a small house at Nabadwip where he set up his Academy (tol) in 
which he taught different branches of the Shastras. Advaita Acharya 



soon acquired the reputation of being one of the most eminent Professors 
of Nabadwip who upheld in all his teachings the pre-eminence of the principle 
of unalloyed devotion to Krishna, which he conclusively established by 
the evidence of the whole body of the Scriptures. This marked him out from 
among the host of the other Brahmanas who also taught the Scriptures at 
Nabadwip. 

Sree Advaita Acharya, in conformity with his teaching, was a devout worshipper 
of Krishna. He did not perform his worship with the elaborate ceremonials that 
characterized its development in the Dvapara Age. He worshipped Krishna with 
the offerings of the spray of tulasi, most beloved of Krishna, and the sacred 
water of the Ganges which issued from His Feet. This simplicity of worship a 
concomitant of the philosophy of pure, transcendental devotion which he 
expounded in his Academy. He wanted to keep the pure devotion to Krishna 
distinct from the lifeless rituals of the elevationists and liberationists. Advaita 
worshipped Krishna with the pure devotion of unclouded cognition and with the 
specific purpose of moving Krishna to come down into the world to re-establish 
the Eternal Religion. The Advent of Sree Chaitanya is attributed by all His 
devotees to the sincere and ardent invocations of Sree Advaita Acharya. That 
Advaita Acharya’s prayers and worship brought about the appearance of the 
Supreme Lord Sree Krishna-Chaitanya in this world, has been repeatedly 
declared by Sree Chaitanya Himself. 

The Academy of Sree Advaita Acharya was the regular meeting place of all the 
Vaishnavas of whom the foremost was Sribas Pandit who lived close to 
Advaita, not far from the House of Sree Jagannatha Misra. 

Sree Advaita Acharya belonged to the community of Sree MadhvAcharya which 
is one of the four authorized Vaishnava communities. He was the disciple of 
the famous Madhabendra Puri, the spiritual preceptor of Sree Nityananda, 

Sree Iswara Puri and several other elders of Sree Chaitanya. 

Madhabendra Puri is regarded by the most illustrious followers of Sree 
Chaitanya as ‘the first tender shoot of the mighty Tree of Transcendental 
Love represented by Sree Chaitanya Himself in its full growth’. There is to be 
found no trace of the amorous love for Krishna in the School of Madhva prior 
to Madhabendra Puri. The disciplic succession of the followers of Sree 
Chaitanya, through Madhabendra Puri, is to be found in Sree Gauraganoddesa, 
Sree Prameyaratnavali, the works of Sree Gopalguru Goswami, and also in 



the Bhaktiratnakar. The line of succession is as follows: 


KRSHNA 

Brahma 

Narada 

Vyasa 

Suka Madhva 

Padmanabha Nrihari Madhaba 

Akshobhya 

Jaya Teertha 

Jnanasindhu 

Dayanidhi 

Vidyanidhi 

Rajendra 

Jayadharma 

Purusottama 

Brahmanya 

Vyasa Teertha 

Lakshmipati 

Madhabendra Puri 

Nityananda Iswara Puri Advaita 


SREE CHAITANYA 



We reserve the detailed discussion of the esoteric implication of the spiritual 
disciplic succession for a future chapter in connection with the doctrine of 
Sree Chaitanya. 

The following particulars regarding Sree Madhabendra Puri are found in Sree 
Chaitanyacharitamrita. He went, unattended by any other person, to 
Sree Brindavana. on his arrival there, as he was seated under a tree on the bank 
of the pool (kunda) of Govinda, Sree Krishna appeared to Madhabendra as a 
cowboy under the guise of offering him milk for appeasing his hunger. Led by 
a dream Madhabendra then installed the Divine Form of Gopala on 
the Gobardhana Mount. His sojourn to Puri to fetch camphor and sandal 
for Gopala and the episode of Kshira-chora Gopinath will be described later. 

At Mathura, Madhabendra Puri accepted the alms of cooked food from a 
Sanoria Brahmana, whose touched water is not accepted by high class Smartas, 
in violation of the smarta practice which errs by applying caste rules to the 
devotee of Godhead and its notions of ceremonial cleanliness to food accepted 
by Krishna (maha-prasad). 

Madhabendra Puri rebuked Ramachandra Puri for his disrespect to himself, his 
spiritual preceptor, and blessed Iswara Puri for his whole-hearted devotion to his 
preceptor by expressing the hope that he might attain to love for Krishna. Sree 
Madhabendra Puri’s utterance at his disappearance is cherished by all 
pure devotees. ‘ It runs thus: ‘Thou Lord, Who art ever melted to kindness 
towards the humble, when wilt Thou, O Lord of Mathura, be seen by me? My 
heart, Dearest, sad for not beholding Thee, grows delirious. Oh! What shall I 
do now?’ 

Sree Iswara Puri came of a Brahmana family belonging to the village of 
Kumarahatta (near Halishahar Station of the E. B. Railway) and was the 
most beloved disciple of Sree Madhabendra Puri. Sree Madhabendra Puri, 
being satisfied with his devotion, blessed him saying, ‘May you attain loving 
devotion for Krishna.’ Sree Chaitanya did him the favour of receiving initiation 
in the ten-lettered mantra from him at Gaya. Govinda and Kashiswara 
Brahmachari, disciples of Sree Iswara Puri, joined Sree Chaitanya at Puri on 
the disappearance of Sree Iswara Puri. 

The attitude, which the reader is expected to take up towards the associates of 
Sree Chaitanya, is put tersely in the opening verse of 

Sree Chaitanyacharitamrita. “Sree Krishna-Chaitanya is Godhead Himself as 



is indicated by His Name Who means the Self-conscious Principle, 

Krishna. Godhead sports in six Divine Forms, viz., as (1) Krishna, (2) the 
Two Preceptors, (3) the Devotees, (4) the Avataras (5) the Manifestations, and 
(6) the Powers. In other words, the Spiritual Preceptors are Chaitanyadeva; 
the devotees such as Sribas, etc., are also Chaitanyadeva; the Avataras 
are Chaitanyadeva; and the Powers are also Chaitanyadeva Who is 
himself Krishna’s Own Cognitive Self, the Subjective Divine Personality Whose 
Essence is Pure Cognition. We shall discuss these truths in greater detail in 
the succeeding chapters. 

I have tried briefly to put before the reader some of those considerations the 
substantive truth of which has to be realized by the disciple in order to be fit 
for studying profitably the holy narrative of the career of Sree Chaitanya. 

I cannot do better than conclude this chapter with the cautious words of Thakur 
Brindabandas, 'Know for certain that the Activities of Chaitanyachandra, by 
listening to which the heart is purified, manifest themselves only by the grace of 
the devotees of Godhead. Who can know the Deeds of Chaitanya that are the 
hidden secret of the Vedas I write only what I have heard from the lips of the 
devotees. I make my obeisance at the feet of all the Vaishnavas. May there be no 
offense committed by me by such an attempt.’ 



Chapter 3 Birth and Infancy 

Why Krishna comes into this world is known only to Himself. The invocation of 
the Lord by Sree Advaita Acharya is stated by devotees as the cause of 
the Advent of Sree Chaitanya. The spiritual Academy of Advaita was the 
gathering-place of all the Vaishnavas of Nabadwip. There they met daily and 
spent a greater part of their time in holy discourses about Krishna. They were 
regarded as a peculiar group whose ways and words appeared alike singular 
and distasteful to the people in the midst of whom they found themselves placed 
by Providence. This small group of devotees felt keenly for the miseries that 
their worldly-minded brethren brought upon themselves by their attachment 
to interests other than Krishna. They tried to instruct them about Krishna. 

But this only served to increase all the more their aversion to Krishna and 
His devotees. 

It was this apparently hopeless state of affairs that led Advaita to the conclusion 
that the universal and stubborn godlessness that prevailed everywhere could only 
be relieved by Krishnachandra Himself. Advaita believed in the efficacy 
of prayer that is offered by one who knows nothing except Godhead. He 
believed that the intolerable anguish, of those sincere devotees who daily 
gathered under his roof, caused by the extreme misery of the worldly people due 
to their bitter aversion to Krishna, must appeal to the Lord and have power to 
draw Him in no long time from His Eternal Seat of Goloka into this world, for 
the consolation of His own beloved ones. Advaita, who was well versed in 
the Scriptures, noticed all these favourable indications. He was so convinced of 
the impending Appearance of Krishna that in his prayers he began to call upon 
Him most ardently night and day to save the world by His speedy Appearance. 

That Advaita felt sure about the Appearance of Sree Krishna and worshipped 
Him for this specific purpose with tulasi and the holy water of the 
Ganges, which are most acceptable to Krishna, With the single-hearted desire for 
His Appearance, was known to all the Vaishnavas. He, in fact, actually assured 
them most clearly and emphatically about the expected Advent of Krishna into 
their midst within a short time. I have stated already that Sree Chaitanya Himself 
repeatedly declared that His Advent was solely due to the whole-hearted prayers 
of Advaita. 


The Advent of Sree Chaitanya in the particular Kali Age that follows the 



Appearance of Sree Krishna at the close of Dvapara, is also hinted by 
the Scriptures. In the Mahabharata it is declared that Krishna appears in the 
Kali Age as a Brahmana with a. yellow complexion to promulgate the yajna in 
the form of congregational Chanting of the kirtana of Hari. The 
Bhagavatam contains the same statement and adds that Krishna appears in the 
above manner in the Kali Age with all His kin, associates, consorts and 
servitors. Krishna Himself appears towards the end of the Dvapara Age of the 
Vaivasvata Manvantara of the twenty-eighth aggregate of four- Yugas of the 
Kalpa of the White Boar. He appears as a Brahmana with the yellow complexion 
in the particular Kali Age following His Appearance in the Dvapara. In the 
Dvapara Krishna appears as Godhead served by His consorts, kindred and 
servitors. In the Kali Age Sree Krishna-Chaitanya appears as the Best of 
devotees in company of the congregation of devotees, viz., His own beloved 
ones in order to teach by His own example how Krishna, i.e, He Himself, is to be 
served. This is the main cause of the Advent of Sree Chaitanya. The prayer of 
Advaita and the suffering of the devotees are the secondary cause. Unless this 
real cause of His Appearance is properly grasped, the most characteristic 
Activities of Sree Chaitanya can never be rightly understood. 

The Appearance of Sree Chaitanya came about in the following way. In 
Nabadwip there dwelt a most generous and pure hearted Brahmana devoted 
to the zealous performance of all religious duties, resembling in his 
immaculate piety Vasudeva, the father of Sree Krishna. The name of this ideal 
Brahmana was Sree Jagannath Misra. we have stated his ancestry in another 
place. His revered consort’s name was Sree Sachi Devi. Sree Sachi Devi was the 
most loyal of matrons, the very embodiment of the pure devotion to Vishnu and 
mother of the whole world. Eight daughters were born to Sachi Devi one after 
another; all of them leaving this world in their infancy. The ninth issue was a son 
whom his parents obtained in response to their prayer to Vishnu for a male 
offspring. The name of this boy was Bisvarupa, the elder brother of Sree 
Chaitanya. 

Sree Krishna entered the persons of Sachi and Jagannath Misra towards the end 
of the month of Magh in the Saka Year fourteen hundred and six (January, 1485 
A.D.). The mouths of Sree Ananta uttered paeans of triumph that were heard by 
Sachi and Jagannath, as in a dream. Jagannath Misra thereupon said to Sachi, T 
had a dream that a realm of light entered my heart and from my heart it passed 
into yours. It seems some great personage is about to be born., There were other 
indications. Misra felt a difference everywhere. His body and the house appeared 



shining like a place dwelt by Lakshmi, the Goddess of every well-being. All 
people showed him honour at all places. Money, clothing, rice, etc., poured 
unsolicited into his house. Sachi noticed heavenly figures in the sky that 
appeared in the attitude of prayer to herself; but no one else observed them. Sree 
Jagannath Misra and Sree Sachi Devi felt transported with inexpressible delight 
and applying themselves with a mind restrained from all other pursuits and with 
special ardour to the worship of Sree Shalagrama, awaited the impending 
Advent of the Lord. Thirteen months were passed in this state of expectant 
suspense. 

Sree Krishna-Chaitanya made His auspicious Appearance in this world on the 
23rd day. of Falgun of the Saka Year 1407, which corresponds to the 18th 
of February of 1486 A. D. He was born in the evening just with the rising of 
the full-moon, which was then in eclipse, in the midst of the loud chant of the 
Name of Hari by the people of Nadia, as is the custom on the occasion of an 
eclipse. Nature joined with man and the gods to pay homage to the Moon 
of Nadia risen on the Eastern Hills. The spotted lunar disc hid its face in 
shame, under the guise of eclipse, on the Appearance of the Perfect Moon 
absolutely free from all spots. On that blessed Moment of Nativity of the 
exquisitely beautiful Baby were shed in unstinted profusion all the most 
auspicious influences of all the favouring constellations, that blended together to 
greet the Advent of the Lord. Strange forms were observed to crowd into the 
yard of Sachi, lying prostrate on the bare earth in the act of adoration, waving 
the whisk, holding aloft the umbrella, singing, dancing and beating the drum 
or playing on the flute, in an ecstasy of unbounded joy. 

That very Moment Advaita suddenly leaped with delight in home and danced 
with joy arm-in-arm with Thakur Haridas to the blissful surprise of on¬ 
lookers. All the devotees had the same experience. The tide of joy that swept and 
eddied over all Nadia and threw the very birds and beasts and all dumb Nature 
into a delirium of ecstatic joy, the pens of Thakur Brindabandas and Kaviraj 
Goswami are alone privileged to describe. The brush of no earthly or celestial 
painter can do justice to the delicate assemblage of colour, warmth, holy 
perfume, the volume of delirious joy, free from the least suggestion of grossness, 
that manifested themselves at the Birth of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya and have 
ever clung to the Holy Eve of His Advent most highly cherished by all pure 
devotees who declare the worship of the day of the Lord’s Advent to have power 
to kindle love for Krishna. 



The Birth of the Baby drew a long train of visitors, male and female, who 
hastened to have a view of the Divine Child and make suitable offerings. 

Gods and goddesses, assuming the forms of men and women, mixing with the 
crowd, made their way to the home of Jagannath Misra, in order to obtain a sight 
of the Baby and greet the Feet of Sree Gaurasundar, dancers, singers, 
musicians, promulgators of auspicious tidings, flocked thither to swell the joy of 
the Festive Occasion. 

Sree Chandrasekhar Acharya and Sribas Pandit duly performed the 
purificatory 

Birth Rites of the Son of Jagannath Misra. Sree Purandar Misra made suitable 
gifts to all those who brought presents for his Boy on this auspicious 
occasion. Sree Sita Thakurani, the consort of Advaita Acharya, made her way to 
Sree Mayapur from her residence at Santipur to see the Prince of Boys. Sree 
Malini Devi, pure-hearted consort of Sribas Pandit, accompanied Sita Thakurani 
with various presents and afforded her eyes the opportunity, that they longed for 
like the bird chakora, of feasting on the nectar flowing from the moonlike Face 
of the Transcendental Baby. Misra distributed whatever he had, with an 
open hand, to the Brahmanas, having first offered the same to Godhead. He 
kept back nothing of the rich variety of presents for himself. Sree 
Nilambar Chakravarti, father of Sachi Devi, taking Misra aside, informed him in 
a whisper that the signs on the Person of the Child prognosticated a very 
great Transcendental Personage Who would deliver the world. 

The Birth of Sree Chaitanya, of which we have culled the above account from 
the narratives of His associates, was never regarded by them as anything like the 
ordinary occurrence of this world with which all of us are so familiar. The raison 
d’etre of their attitude is thus put by Thakur Brindabandas in a passage of the 
Nativity Hymn sung by the gods on the occasion: ‘He, Who is All-Will Who can 
destroy the whole world at His Will, could certainly also therefore 
destroy Kamsa, Ravana and other enemies of Godhead instantaneously, and by 
His mere fiat. But although He could do so, He killed Ravana by, being 
Himself born in the Home of Dasaratha and slew Kamsa by, being Himself born 
as the Son of Vasudeva; because He is ever full of All-joyous Activities. 

‘The realm of Nabadwip where Krishna makes His Appearance is no mundane 
region.’ The transcendental realm of Sree Krishna is identical with the power 
of Godhead known as Neela or Leela and is an object of worship of His 



devotees. The Yoga peetha, i.e., the Abode of Sachi-Jagannath, situate in the 
center of Sree Mayapur, is the Plane of the Appearance of the Lord and is 
identical with Brindavana or the mind of the devotee constituted of the pure 
cognitive essence. Sree Nabadwip is replete with the ninefold devotion, being of 
the nature of the heart of those pure devotees who have found the Refuge of 
the Lotus-Feet of Sree Gurudeva. Such is the language of realization that is used 
by the devotees in regard to Nabadwip, which is necessarily unintelligible by, 
the method of delusive mundane analogies. But we need not, therefore, reject 
the testimony of those whom we have accepted as our authorities, not on 
the ground that it is untrustworthy or dishonest but for the irrelevant reason that 
it is not perfectly intelligible to those who are destitute of pure devotion to 
the Holy Feet of Godhead. This would be against all principles of impartial 
history and, as regards the theistic account, will result in the retention of the 
chaff by elimination of the grain under the untenable plea of our own ignorance. 

We have merely referred to certain spiritual values to prevent misconception of 
the Great Event that we are describing. Those values will be fully discussed later 
on when we arrive at the proper point of the narrative. But there are 
other considerations that it is necessary to place before the reader in order to 
enable him to follow the development of the narrative itself. 

Godhead and His devotees appear in this world by the operation of the 
transcendental positive Power of the Divinity that directly attends on His Person. 
Individual souls (jivas) are born by the operation of the deluding stupefying 
power of Godhead that can never abide in the Presence of the Divinity. The 
material cases enveloping individual souls (jivas) are the creation of the deluding 
power and such envelopment is the misfortune that overtakes them in 
consequence of the deliberate practice of aversion to Godhead. The worldly 
birth, through the medium of material bodies, belongs to the category of material 
phenomena, being brought about by the operation of the Deluding Energy as the 
result of the soul’s desire for worldly enjoyment. 

The Appearance of Godhead and His devotees in this world is not the 
consequence of the practice of any previous aversion to Godhead either by 
wish or activity, nor due to the operation of the Deluding Power. Godhead and 
His devotees appear in this world their own will through the medium of 
the Transcendental Power. The Nature of Godhead and His devotees is such that 
it simultaneously enlightens and deludes conditioned souls to whom 
They appear. They reveal their transcendence to those conditioned souls 



who sincerely want to serve the Lord and at one and the same time appear to 
those who are averse to His service, as deluding phenomena of this world. The 
Birth of Godhead, the Realm of Godhead, the devotees of Godhead, thus remain, 
in their proper transcendental nature, ever inaccessible to the 
deluded understanding of all irreverent persons. This may not be tasty to 
arrogant godless intellectualism, but is nevertheless the only position that is 
perfectly reasonable and logical to the understanding that is not prepared 
to hypocritically disown its consciousness of its present limitations and 
the consequent imperative necessity of welcoming the entry of the Truth, 
however opposed the Truth may seem at first sight to all its most deeply 
cherished prejudices. 

Those, therefore, who are prepared to maintain that the Birth of Sree Chaitanya 
is an ordinary affair of this world, start deliberately on the wrong track 
and should not blame anybody but themselves if they find the narrative 
not perfectly amenable to those rules of probability which are derived from 
their worldly experience. Sree Chaitanya’s Birth appeared, for this very reason at 
the time of its occurrence, as an ordinary event of this world to His 
contemporaries with the exception of the comparatively small group of His 
devotees. It is not the untrue experience of the atheists which the reader of these 
pages is offered as The history of theism ’. Neither is he asked to deny the 
existence of the experience of the atheists. But he is asked not to accept their 
experience as theistic or true nor to confound Godhead with the fallen souls of 
this world. 

The Birth of Sree Chaitanya was brought about by the operation of the 
Transcendental Power of Godhead who is categorically different from 
His material Energy. Sree Jagannath Misra and Sree Sachi Devi who is 
not metaphorically but really the mother of the whole world, are the eternal 
Parents of Godhead. Their minds and bodies are constituted of the principle of 
pure cognition which is categorically different from the constituent principle of 
the body and mind of ordinary mortals. ‘Vasudeva’ is the Scriptural term to 
denote this pure cognitive essence. Vasudeva, Son of Vasudeva, manifests 
Himself only in Vasudeva, or the pure consciousness, for playing His Pastimes. 
The relationship between Sree Jagannath Misra and Sree Sachi Devi or the 
seeming pregnancy of the latter, does not belong to the category of the sensual 
affairs of men and women who are given to the pleasures of the flesh. The 
real significance of the Conception of the Lord by Sree Sachi Devi and of 
its transcendental purity will appear to the mind, only if it is in a position 



to realize the eternal difference between the spiritual and the material. 

The account of the devotees will then be truly understood and it cannot 
be understood in any other way even by the greatest intellectual giants of 
this world. 

The process of the Transcendental Birth of Godhead is thus described in 
Sreemad Bhagavatam. Thereafter the Portion of the Changeless transmitted 
by Sree Vasudeva was conceived by Devaki of pure cognitive essence. Just as 
the quarter of the East conceives the image of the moon, Sree Devaki 
also conceived in the same manner Sree Hari, the Supreme Soul of all souls, by 
her non-mundane mind.’ This process is not confined to only Vasudeva 
and Devaki. It is the same also in the case of the devotees. Before 
Godhead manifests Himself to the devotee in the visible Form, a long period 
passes during which He is manifest internally in his pure consciousness. 
Thereafter as the quarter of the East holds the disc of the moon, Devaki of pure 
cognition by the process of initiation in Krishna by Surasena (Vasudeva) 
received in her transcendentaly pure heart Sree Achyuta, the Embodiment of the 
universal wellbeing, the Supreme Soul of all souls.’ From these statements of the 
Bhagavatam it would appear that Sree Krishna first appeared in the heart of 
Anakadundubhi and from there appeared in the heart of Sree Devaki. The entry 
into the womb of Sree Devaki alluded to in the Nativity Hymn of the 
Bhagavatam is not different from the above. 

Godhead and His devotees are not born by the operation of the material Energy 
by means of the seminal fluid and blood, etc. The greatest of all offenses that 
it is possible to commit against the Divinity is to suppose that His Body 
is material like that of the bound jzva. Godhead and His devotees have no 
material bodies and are not born by the operation of any material conditions. 

The Appearance of Sree Chaitanya and His devotees is free from any touch of 
the material principle. This is the realization of all the devotees in accordance 
with the declaration of the Scriptures. Theistic history, although it 
certainly transcends and explains does not ignore this phenomenal world; and 
those, who object to the transcendental on the ground that it is not conformable 
by the worldly experience of men, do not thereby disprove either the reality or 
the necessity of such history. 

The successive disappearances of eight daughters, followed by the appearance of 
Viswarup and Sree Chaitanya, the two Sons, of Sree Sachi Devi, are 
explained on the analogy of the case of Sree Devaki recorded in the Bhagavatam 



as symbolizing the esoteric fact that the Appearance of Sree Krishna is preceded 
by that of Samkarsana, the Pure Cognitive Principle who manifests Himself on 
the subsidence of the eightfold envelope of physical Nature, viz., the eight 
pseudoegoistic principles, that bars the access of the bound jiva to the 
transcendental. 

The necessity of the closest consideration of the difference between the spiritual 
and material can alone enable one to reconcile the apparently 
contradictory statements regarding the Absolute that are a subject of standing 
complaint to all who, for extraneous reasons, do not seek the explanation in the 
Scriptures themselves. The Lord says: T exist eternally; nothing existed before 
Me, neither the non-existent nor the existent and nothing exists to the end and 
beyond the end except Myself. Therefore, those foolish persons, who think 
slightingly of My Human Form, do so through ignorance of My real Nature Who 
transcends everything of this world. They think that I am like themselves subject 
to the laws that have been made by Myself. They cannot understand that I exist 
in absolute independence of all rules which only serve to manifest Myself; 
and that I am the Supreme Lord of everything including all rules and 
conditions. Therefore, I can make My real Form visible to mortal eyes without 
ceasing to be the Master of this world and without submitting to any laws of 
physical Nature, and may at the same time delude all those who are averse to Me 
by appearing to them as an ordinary human being, subject, like themselves, to 
the operation of the laws of this universe. Know that this is the specific privilege 
reserved for Godhead, and herein lies the proof of His Supremacy, that He 
remains unaffected by the qualities of physical Nature even when He appears to 
be situated within its sphere.’ Godhead has a specific Personality of His own, 
but He is subject to no limitations. In Him all opposite qualities meet and 
are reconciled losing all their apparent grossness. But He also chooses to appear 
as an abstract principle to the idealist and as capable of grossness to 
the materialist, who are thus punished for trying to make the Absolute submit 
to their deluded speculations. 

Sree Chaitanya appeared in this world on the full-moon eve of the month of 
Falgun, that most glorious eve of spring, which is reverentially consecrated 
to the Swinging Festival of Sree Krishna, like unto the spotless Moon risen on 
the Eastern Hills of Gau_adesha, the lunar disc itself having just then undergone 
a total eclipse. His Advent was greeted by an outburst of the universal chant 
of the Name Hari by all people of Nadia. In the midst of this 
unconscious jubilation, the Baby came out of the mother’s womb and began at 



once to smile. Sachi and Jagannath were transformed into the very image of joy 
on beholding the beautiful Face of their Son. The ladies in attendance got 
perplexed and did not know what to do and accordingly began, for no reason, to 
shout ‘Jais’ (jubilations). 

The glad tidings quickly brought together all the relations and friends who dwelt 
in the neighbourhood. We have already related the communication of Sree 
Nilambar Chakravarti, father of Sachi Devi, to Misra regarding the marvellous 
signs that he noticed on the Person of the new-born Babe. Nilambar Chakravarti 
was a very great astrologer. After considering the positions of the planets and the 
constellations at the Birth of the Child, he declared that the Boy would be far 
greater than a ‘King’, greater than Brihaspati, the celestial sage, in learning and 
would without effort come to possess all good qualities. Presently there arrived 
by accident a certain Brahmana, also an astrologer, who applied himself to the 
casting of the horoscope of the Newborn. That Brahmana declared as the result 
of his calculations that the Boy is no other than Narayana Himself. ‘He will re¬ 
establish the Religion. He will be the extraordinary Preacher of the Religion. He 
will deliver the whole world. All persons will obtain from Him what is 
constantly coveted by the greatest devotees, such as Brahma, Siva, Suka, etc. At 
the sight of Him all the people of the world will be melted to pity for all jivas, 
become indifferent to pain and pleasure alike, and attain to love for Him the 
Embodiment of love for Krishna. Not to speak of others, even the Yavanas, who 
are declared enemies of Vishnu, will worship the Feet of this Child. All the 
countless worlds will sing His praise. All people, from the Brahmanas 
downwards, will do obeisance to Him. His Form is the very 

Embodiment of the religion of the greatest devotees, the Embodiment of 
patience and of respect for the gods, Brahmanas, preceptors and parents. Just 
as Vishnu appearing in this world persuades all jivas to religion, exactly same 
will be all the Doings of this Child. How fortunate indeed am I to be called 
to calculate such a horoscope! His name will be Sree Vishwambhar.’ 

The astrologer purposely omitted to mention the Renunciation of Sree 
Chaitanya, lest it would mar the unmixed happiness of the occasion. 

Misra was so greatly moved by these statements that he first of all thought of 
offering a suitable reward to the astrologer; but, presently- remembering 
the extreme poverty of himself, grasped the feet of the Brahmana and burst 
into tears, unable any longer to contain his joy. That Brahmana also wept, 
clasping the feet of Sree Jagannath Misra. All the people caught the impulse and 



joyously shouted the Name of Hari. The friends and well-wishers of Misra, on 
hearing of the nature of the Divine Horoscope, joined in this loud demonstration 
of joy. 

It may interest the reader to be reminded of the fact that the great astrologer 
Garga who calculated the horoscope of Sree Krishna is described in 
the Bhagavatam as a Brahmana skilled in the transcendental science. The 
Name Viswambhara is applied to Vishnu in the Atharva-Veda Samhita (2-3-4-5) 
and means ‘One Who holds or nourishes the world’. 

Sachi noticed female figures, who were divinely beautiful, who smilingly put 
blades of the durba with grains of unhusked rice on the Head of the Infant 
and uttered the benedictory formula, ‘Live Thou for ever’, and who took the dust 
of her feet on their heads as they departed. Sachi was dumb with joy and 
could not even ask the names of those new-comers. These performances 
were accompanied by the customary song, dance and music of the 
professional musicians on such occasions. 

The Baby had to remain for a full moth in the lying-in chamber according to 
custom. The small hut, that was made for the occasion for the 
temporary accommodation of the mother and the Child, was watched night and 
day by all kinsfolk. This was due to two reasons. The Boy cried incessantly and 
kept quiet only just as long as He heard the Name of Hari uttered in a loud voice. 
This was soon grasped by all, who chanted aloud the Name of Hari, as soon as 
the Child began to cry, as the only means of pacifying Him. There was another 
reason for constant vigilance. There was an unaccountable fear, which was 
shared by all persons, that the life of the Baby was in danger from goblins and 
thieves. They accordingly often recited the customary invocations to Vishnu and 
Devi for the protection of the Child. The Name of Nrisimha was often similarly 
taken. Mantrams were used to render all sides of the hut secure against evil 
influences. But notwithstanding all these precautions, there were frequent alarms 
caused by supposed detection of the egress of thieves and goblins who often 
made their way into the house unperceived even by such a large body of devoted 
watchers. It was, in fact, the gods who played all these pranks for a sight of the 
Baby and lingered to amuse on the causeless anxiety of all persons on the Baby’s 
account. 

At the end of the period of confinement all the ladies accompanied Sree Sachi 
Devi for her bath in the Bhagirathi. After bathing in the river and 



having worshipped the Ganges, they made their way to the grove of the goddess 
‘Sashi accompanied by singers and musicians. On their return to the house, 

Sachi honoured every one of the party by presents of fried rice, plantain, 
oil, vermillion, areca-nut and betel. Thereupon the ladies went back to their 
homes after greeting the feet of the mother. 

Orthodox smarta Hindus are likely to read in the above account an apparent 
justification of their customary practices as being confirmed, by having 
been duly observed by Sree Jagannath Misra and Sree Sachi Devi whose minds 
are free from all impurities and errors. Those, on the other hand, who look 
upon such local Hindu practices as being due to ignorance of the 
Shastras, superstition or historical circumstances, will also naturally experience 
a certain measure of the qualms of an outraged conscience if they have to 
prepare to swallow these descriptions, with the best of grace that they can call to 
their help, through sheer good-will for an otherwise untenable cause. Historians 
will feel scandalized by this attempt to chronicle the unnecessary details of 
such petty domestic matters that are perfectly known to everybody. Those, who 
look for the account of the Absolute as a philosophical realization, will regard it 
as puerile sentimentalism. Those, who believe in the Personal God but expect 
a narrative in keeping with the supreme dignity of the Subject, may also 
be disposed to scratch their heads. And the atheists will pooh pooh what they 
will at once recognize as a brazen, ridiculous, insipid, and silly attempt of 
passing off the minutiae of Bengali superstitious usages upon credulous 
religionists in the name of the latest Divine Dispensation, etc., etc. 

But the reader, who has followed the narrative so far, need not be told that events 
that happen in this world are divisible into two groups that are quite distinct from 
one another, viz., (1) those events that take place on the physical plane, and (2) 
those that occurring on the spiritual manifest Themselves also on the mundane 
plane. The Birth of Godhead in this world is an Event that belongs to the second 
group. It appears like an event belonging to the first group, to all bound jivas for 
the reason that they try to see Godhead by their own right, whereas the Absolute 
never submits to the inspection of the limited. To such people accordingly even 
the Transcendental Activities of Godhead appear as limited occurrences capable 
of being accurately graded in an order of importance ( ?). 

But Krishna is declared by the Scriptures to be identical with the Absolute Truth 
Whose Activities admit of no such offensive classifications. Good and bad, great 
and small, are notions that only belong to the realm of the relative, limited, 



divisible and fragmentary knowledge. The Reality is Only One, in spite of the 
fact that only a perverted view of Him happens to be the sole, 
undoubted birthright of all conditioned souls. No event is really good or bad, 
small or great. All events are of infinite dimensions and instinct with the 
cognitive potency. They appear to be limited, inert, cramped and possessed 
of unwholesome qualities to those jivas whose own natures seem to their 
deluded judgment to be limited, inert, cramped and gross for the time being. The 
vision of the devotee is free from all defects, and when they describe to us what 
they see, we, conditioned souls, pretend to feel in duty bound to disagree with 
them on the strength of our own unreliable but actual experience of those very 
same events. 

No petty domestic event of this world, meaning what appears as such to the 
vision of bound jivas, can have even its so-called limited existence, unless 
it belongs to the realm of Vaikuntha where it can be also neither petty nor 
great in the material sense. The domestic events, connected with Godhead 
Himself (and His own) when He chooses to appear in this world, possess this 
additional peculiarity that they are really free from all grossness even from the 
point of view of the bound jiva, if he does not deliberately shut his eyes and ears 
and refuse to see and hear. That is to say, if he only really begins to see and 
hear with an unbiased mind, he at once realizes this truth for himself. This 
process is known as the descent of the transcendental into this world. The birth 
and activities of conditioned souls (/z'vas) do not possess the transcendental 
quality. Their bodies and minds are of this world and their activities are 
only insubstantial mimicries of the Reality. This mimicry is not Absolute but 
relative reality, being the result of the operation of the deluding power of 
Godhead. Its existence is not denied, nor its nature which is, however, 
categorically different from that of the spiritual. Its essence is comparable to that 
of the reflected image of the actual form of an object. By no manner of 
inspection of the image a knowledge of the nature and qualities of the actual 
substance can be obtained. But when the actual substance presents itself to our 
inspection, we can easily get the true knowledge of it, if only we do not 
perversely choose to regard it as image on the strength of deceptive analogical 
arguments supplied by our exclusive experience of a world of reflected images. 

The paternal affection of Sree Jagannath Misra and Sree Sachi Devi for Sree 
Gaursundar is also likewise different from the apparently similar affection 
of mundane parents for their mundane child. In the former case, the Parents, 

Son and Affection are real and free from all worldly grossness, while the latter is 



a perverted mimicry of the same event reflected on the screen of the 
physical plane. But this qualitative difference between the two cannot be grasped 
by those who have not the patience to give an unbiased hearing to the words of 
the devotees describing the Reality Who alone possesses an unclouded vision, 
even though they may appear to hasty, prejudiced or superficial observers to be 
in no way unlike ordinary bound jivas. The devotees alone can teach us the 
real meaning of the Scriptures, and our duty, as will appear from what has been 
said already, consists in listening to their words with faith in order to be able 
to understand what they have got to deliver. 

The affection of Sree Jagannath Misra and Sree Sachi Devi for their Divine Son, 
being the Substantive Reality deserves to be considered by all bound jivas 
from every angle of vision with the object not of ignoring but of understanding 
its transcendental nature. 

Sree Jagannath Misra and Sree Sachi Devi, by reason of their perfect purity of 
heart, when they desired to have a Son born to them, could only mean to 
serve Godhead thereby. This exclusive and real reference to Him in every act 
is innate in the only function of the pure cognitive principle. A really pure heart 
is not satisfied with the mundane relationship, neither does it want to lose 
the faculty for contracting all relationship. It wants to realize all relationships 
in their true forms. This is its very nature who finds himself thwarted at every 
step in the conditioned state by undesirable factors. The ascetic’s heart is not 
really pure, if it stands merely for the negation of all attachments for the reason 
that they happen to be always of a mixed character in this world. Such a view 
errs by seeking the ease of its deluded self by the self-contradictory process 
of suicide. This is the strange aspiration of all negativist thinkers. Those, 
whose hearts are somewhat purer, try to adjust themselves to existing conditions 
to the best of their power. They also err in as much as they vainly try to deal with 
the shadow by. gratuitously assuming it to be the substance. This wild goose- 
chase goes in our Shastras under the name offruitive work (Karma). Those, 
whose hearts are purest, begin to see the impossibility and unwholesomeness of 
the task that is attempted by fruitive workers and the suicidal policy of 
nihilistic thinkers and ascetics. It is at this stage that the Reality manifests 
Himself of His own accord to the absolutely pure vision. And as soon as such 
favoured persons have thus a vision of the Truth, they want to communicate the 
tidings of Him to their suffering brethren; but they soon find that the hearts of 
the latter are not sufficiently pure either to grasp or even tolerate the real Truth 
Whom they also profess with their lips to be willing to serve. Such perverse 



people can hardly be expected to understand the nature of the longing for a Son 
of Sree Jagannath Misra and Sree Sachi Devi, nor the reason of their causeless 
and holy joy on beholding the beautiful Face of New-born Gaursundar. 

Of course neither Sree Jagannath Misra nor Sree Sachi Devi was aware that their 
Son was Sree Krishna Himself. They simply looked upon Sree Gaursundar 
as their Son Whom it was their duty and pleasure to serve in every way. This 
is also the highest form of the spiritual service. The Lord can be served in 
all circumstances and under every form. He is served as a Son, because a 
perfectly pure heart serves nothing except the Lord, but also does so 
unconsciously by reason of the very perfection of his serving disposition. Those, 
who want to serve Sree Krishna as their Son in a conscious way, are not 
altogether free from the idea of reverence due to Godhead! They will fail to 
practice the unmixed parental affection for the Lord, if they are at all conscious 
of His Divinity. In such a case they will revere and love Him. Such parental 
affection does not perfectly please Godhead, the Son. He wants to be served with 
the perfect impulse of unmixed parental love which is absolutely free from 
any considerations that stand in the way of loving by a spontaneous impulse. 

In such hearts the Lord Himself appears as the Son Who is also entirely 
dependent on His parents for His safety and nourishment. 

It will appear, therefore, that the only condition of the service of the Lord is a 
perfectly pure heart. No opposition to form is admissible. Therefore, those 
who look only to the form, may suppose that the customs of Bengal or India 
should be adopted, if the Lord is to be properly served. This is the national or 
smarta point of view. 

The perfectly pure heart is neither wedded, nor opposed, to the form of the 
mundane customs of any Age or country. What he wants to do is to serve 
the Lord. Any real method is legitimate that actually enables him to do this 
one thing needful. If he appears thereby to put himself even under 
specific restraints, he does so for all the greater facility of such unconditional 
service. Why the devotee behaves in a particular way is known only to himself 
and to Krishna. It is not something external and capable of external regulation 
or explanation. It is perfectly free. It cannot be squeezed into the four corners of 
a social or a tentative religious code. Whatever the devotee does is right 
and proper by reason of his exclusive devotion to Sree Krishna. Sree 
Jagannath Misra and Sree Sachi Devi really belong to this superior plane. Their 
conduct should not be supposed to come under any class of activities capable of 



being regulated by a conventional and rigid code of rules. Rules are intended for 
those who are disinclined to serve, i.e., for restraining those who are disposed 
to worldliness, for the purpose, if possible, of preventing a conduct that 
is incompatible with real freedom. But the rules themselves are not identical 
with freedom. The strict observance of any rules cannot produce the purity of 
heart that is necessarily free. Therefore, one must not allow himself to be 
unduly obsessed by these rules, when one has to consider the transcendental 
conduct of the real devotee. We should rather try to understand the limits of the 
rules from the conduct of the devotee. It is only ,the underlying principle of 
devotion to Godhead that can impart any value to such rules. 

The worship of the Ganges and of the goddess ‘Sasthi’ by Sree Sachi Devi are 
such concrete processes. In her case they were rendered of universal significance 
fit for the service of the Lord by reason of her devotion to Sree Gaursundar. This 
led the Lord Himself to directly accept any service, whatever its form, that was 
rendered by her pure heart. Whatever method is adopted for the service of the 
Lord forthwith loses its mundane character by reason of its being so employed 
and becomes spiritual on being accepted by Krishna. All those, who watched the 
Baby and recited invocatory verses calling upon Devi and Nrisimha for the 
protection of the Baby, also served the Lord in the perfect manner, because they 
served Him spontaneously. Whenever any efforts are directed towards the 
Divinity without reservation, they automatically lose all their unwholesomeness 
for the reason that God is pleased to accept our wholehearted service. This 
causeless Divine mercy towards all souls prompted the Appearance of Sree 
Gaursundar in this world. 

It will thus appear that any and all exercise of the senses, when it is really 
directed towards the Lord of our senses, is perfect, while apparently the 
same activity, when it is practiced towards any other object, is not only not 
perfect but is positively harmful being obstructive of the possibility of 
attainment of the natural function. In the language of the Vaishnavas, “Serving 
Sree Krishna with all our spiritual senses, is dove’; while similarly serving any 
other object is ‘lust’.” Or to put it in another way, The desire to gratify, the 
senses of Krishna is love, while the wish to satisfy one’s own senses is lust. The 
proposition is liable to be misunderstood and, as a matter of fact, has actually 
been misunderstood, in different ways. The philanthropists have supposed that it 
is mundane relationship with Krishna that is recommended. But as Krishna is not 
available in a bodily form in this world, they accordingly want to devise a 
method of serving themselves by personating Krishna and the milk-maids, or 



trying to imagine that they are spiritually occupied in every act of their gross 
sensuality. They choose to think gratuitously that Krishna is a being of this world 
like themselves. There is another class of philanthropists who proceed in 
the negative way, being repelled by the debaucheries of the first group. 

These suppose that it is a sin to believe that the Absolute can at all be served in 
a concrete manner. The Absolute is accordingly supposed to be capable of 
being served only on the mental plane by the homage of thought. 

These philanthropists keep their life in its concrete acts strictly separate from 
the Absolute reserving it for the gratification of their own sensuous 
desires excusing themselves by imagining that this is unavoidable as long as 
they continue in the state of mundane existence. They supplement their disregard 
of the virtuous activities of this life by an endeavour to rise above them (?) 
by meditation (?) on the Activities (?) of Krishna, or by fictitious avoidance of 
all thinking. 

In these ways the people of this world delude themselves by the pernicious 
practice of actual debauchery or by hypocritical and impracticable 
abstention into supposing that their method is higher than that of professed 
sensualists. 

But in both cases the root of the error is the same, viz., the belief that Krishna, 
when He chooses to appear to us in the Human Form, puts on a body of 
flesh like ourselves and that, therefore, those, who served Him at the time of 
His Appearance in different ways as servants, friends, parents, sweet¬ 
hearts, practiced activities that are in no way different from those with which 
we ourselves are so familiar in this world and from the grossness of which we 
have no desire of seeking to escape. The one class directly swallows the mud, 
the other group pretends to live on nectar while actually deriving their 
sustenance from the same polluted source but with great labour and through a 
longer pipe. None of them suspect that it is the mud, nor that it is capable of 
being transformed into nectar by the real Touch of the Divinity, or, in other 
words, that there is a third alternative to enjoyment and hypocritical show 
of abstention which has the form of spiritual service that transcends both 
and reconciles those opposites on a higher plane. What is really necessary is not 
to wrangle over the sharing of the mud, but to be lifted out of such necessity 
for feasting on the manna. The idealist’s position is a mere travesty by which 
the love of gross matter is attempted to be disguised from the observation of 
dull persons. But it only mocks the thirsty soul by the offer of the masked bowl 
of the dregs of the noxious preparation, in place of the ostentatiously filled cup 



of poison, to the thirsty soul who has need of only the life-giving drink. 



Chapter 4 Infancy and Boyhood 


But although Sree Gaursundar submitted to be served by the unconscious perfect 
love of Braja by His parents, relatives, friends and servants, His Divinity was 
manifested in every Act of His Infancy, unnoticed by anyone. This is the hidden 
Leela. of Sree Chaitanya. He can never be really known except through His 
Grace which is available to all jivas who sincerely seek to obtain it. 

The Baby continued to keep everybody occupied by His peculiar Ways. The 
most noticeable of these was that He would begin to cry if He did not hear 
the loud chant of the Name of Hari. So He was always surrounded by a group 
of ladies who sang constantly the kirtan in order to keep Him in countenance. 
The moment they would begin to perform kirtan, the Boy showed every mode 
of delight and would laugh in the most enchanting manner. They clapped 
their hands, sang and considered themselves amply repaid by His Sweet Smiles. 
This was noticed and advertised by everybody as a most extraordinary 
circumstance. The conduct of the Baby and the devoted attachment of the ladies, 
who were so loath to leave His Presence form a most striking episode on which 
all narratives of His Infancy love to dwell with great tenderness. 

The Lord used always to lie on His Back surrounded by the ladies, except while 
He slept. One day Sachi was brought to the room, where the Baby slept, by 
His waking cry. As she entered the apartment, she was surprised to find the floor 
of the room littered with all different substances. Oil, ghee, milk, curd, pulse, 
etc., with broken earthen pots, were all jumbled together in every part of the 
room. Sachi Devi chanted the Name of Hari in order to pacify the Baby of barely 
four months, who lay crying in His little bed. She noticed the presence of no 
other person in the room. Other members of the family presently came to the 
spot, but no one could discover any trace of an intruder. Some opined that a 
demon must have found his way into the room but failed to do any harm to the 
Child by reason of His protective amulet. His failure to harm the Baby had made 
him angry and commit all the mischief before he fled back to his place. 

Jagannath Misra on beholding the scene of havoc said nothing, regarding it as an 
act of the gods. The parents thought in this wise in their joy that no harm had 
befallen the Baby. 

There was some funny incident or other like this every day, to afford an 
opportunity of service to the parents and others. Their service must not 



be supposed to be on a level with the activities of worldly people who are 
always very much attached to their own children. The affection of worldly 
people for their children, is purely an attachment of the flesh for the flesh that 
serves to gratify their sensuous instincts. Such affection only rivets the chain of 
bondage to the thing of this world, all of which are the contrivances of the 
deluding Energy or non-God. It was not so in this case. The paternal affection, 
that serves Godhead, is not only altogether different from the apparently 
similar worldly sentiment, but, on the contrary, is so much opposed in its nature 
to the latter that the two cannot co-exist in the same heart. One who loves his 
worldly son, as son, can never realize the nature of the affection of Sree Sachi 
Devi and Sree Jagannath Misra for Sree Gaursundar, because the worldly 
passion itself stands in the way of such realization. 

The time passed in such pastimes till at last the day of naming the Baby made its 
appearance. For this purpose there assembled a number of friends versed in the 
Scriptures, chief of whom was Sree Nilambar Chakravarti. There was also 
a corresponding gathering of the matrons. The latter declared that the 
Baby should be called ‘Nimai’ after the ‘Neem’ tree, for the reason that the bitter 
taste characteristic of the said tree would repel the god of death who had taken 
away so many children of His parents, and would also serve to scare away 
ghosts, demons and other evil spirits. The learned headed by Nilambar 
Chakravarti agreed to accept the Name ‘Nimai’ as a secondary one, and 
proposed ‘Viswambhar’ as the primary Name of the Baby. The reason given for 
their choice of this Name was that the fear of famine, which had threatened 
the whole country, had been dissipated by the Birth of the Child, which 
had brought in its train copious showers of rain after a prolonged drought. As 
the Birth of the Child had saved the world from famine, the Name Viswambhar 
was appropriate for Him as it means ‘One Who maintains the world'. Another 
reason for the selection of the Name was that in His horoscope the Boy was 
described as ‘the Source-light ’ which meant that ‘all other lights (of the family) 
were derived from this One’. The ceremony was performed at an auspicious 
moment Amidst the holy chant of the Name of Hari, the sound of conches and 
bells, by men and gods, while the Brahmanas read the Geeta and the 
Bhagavatam. 

Naming a baby is one of the ten purificatory rites that are enjoined by the 
Shastras and are performed by the smartas to free a new-born child from sin due 
to the impurities of seminal birth from the mother’s womb. The sin as well as its 
expiatory rite, as contemplated by the smartas, are conceived in terms 



of material well-being. There is no question in it of the soul, or 
spiritual consideration. The birth of a bound jiva is no doubt a material 
circumstance and the smarta rites are also admittedly a material device to ward 
off certain worldly results of such birth. The material world being the limit of the 
smarta outlook, a smarta family adheres to those ceremonies in the hope of 
the mundane reward promised by the sections of the Scriptures that treat of 
fruitive works and ceremonies. But a Vaishnava has nothing to do with any so- 
called mundane well-being that has no connection with the soul. Moreover 
Sree Gaursundar’s Birth, or the birth of any devotee of Godhead, as we have 
seen already, is never to be considered, for very good reasons, as a temporal 
affair at all. What, therefore, it may be asked, is the significance of the parents of 
Sree Gaursundar following the smarta practice that has led the Vaishnava 
narrators of the Career of Sree Chaitanya to write of it as a praise-worthy 
performance? 

We have already considered a similar objection in connection with the worship 
of the goddess Sasthi by Sree Sachi Devi. The Vaishnavas regard the 
presiding deities of this mundane world as servants of Krishna and honour them 
as such. They do not regard them as independent divinities. They never worship 
these gods for securing any worldly advantages which are bestowed by them 
in accordance with the Will of Godhead. The Vaishnavas hold that those gods 
are not fully- pleased if they are worshipped for worldly favours; and, as 
servants of Godhead, they are also not entitled to be worshipped on their own 
account. They are fully and truly served by the worship of Godhead, and, 
therefore, the Vaishnavas worship only Vishnu. The worship of the goddess 
Sasthi, who is protectress of new-born babies, in the case of Sree Sachi Devi, did 
not, however, degenerate into poly theism or atheism for the reason that it 
happened to be performed for the sake of God Himself. Any act that possesses 
this characteristic is essentially spiritual. The conduct of Sachi cannot, 
therefore, serve as a precedent to justify the similar materialistic smarta practices 
which have nothing to do with Godhead. 

The above argument applies to the performance by Sachi of all other Shastric 

rites also. Those acts being performed for the sake of Godhead Himself 

are thereby converted into spiritual service of Godhead. Instead of being a cause 

of further bondage, which is the desired result of the smarta practices, 

the apparently similar activities of Sree Jagannath Misra and Sree Sachi Devi 

add new variety of exquisiteness to the service of Godhead, in the shape of 

parental affection. 



The Name Viswambhar should not also be supposed to be on a level with the 
ordinary names that are bestowed on babies on this occasion by the 
smarta priests. The reason for the choice of the Name, as given out by Sree 
Nilambar Chakravarti, the great astrologer of Nabadwip of his day, has been 
already reproduced. That statement deliberately conceals, under metaphorical 
garb, the Truth that revealed Himself clearly to him. The Name ‘Viswambhar’ is 
a well-known Shastric Name of the Divinity. The Name refers specifically to the 
Acts of two Avataras of Vishnu, vis., the Varaha ( Boar ) and the Hayagriba ( 
Horseheaded ). The Former lifted with His Tusk the world submerged by the 
Deluge, while the Latter rescued the Vedas when they were on the point of 
being suppressed by materialistic learning. Anyone with a slight acquaintance 
with the Scriptures would, in thinking of Godhead, connect these events with 
the Name ‘Viswambhar’. The Name ‘Nimai’, intended to scare away 
premature death and all fear, is also perfectly applicable to Godhead. But this is 
not all. Gargacharya, who calculated the Name of Sree Krishna, is described in 
the Bhagavatam as being the greatest of those who know the Brahman and 
was selected for this reason by King Nanda to choose the Name of his New¬ 
born Son. In fact no one who has not access to the spiritual realm, can know 
the Name of the Divinity. 

The Holy Name of Godhead is eternal and is identical with Godhead Himself. In 
the case of Godhead there is no difference between Name, Form, Quality, 

Acts and Associates, as we find on the finite plane in the case of conditioned 
souls. The eternal Name of God, who manifested Himself to the pure 
consciousness of Sree Gargacharya, made Himself known to the people of this 
world under the guise of the ceremony of Naming the Divine Baby, for the 
highest benefit of the conditioned souls. The Names Visambhar and Nimai 
similarly made Themselves known through Sree Nilambar Chakravarti and the 
pure-hearted matrons, not to cleanse the so-called impurities of birth of the 
material body of a new-born child which is the object of the smarta ceremony, 
but in order to bless the whole world by making it possible for all conditioned 
souls to take the Holy Names of Godhead, identical with Godhead Himself and 
having the specific power, if taken without offense, i.e., with the object of 
realizing one’s eternally loving relationship with God, to deliver all fallen jivas 
from the bondage of this world. 

Sree Gargacharya disclosed the Names Rama and Krishna, the most cherished 
Treasures of his heart that was eternally illuminated with Their Divine Radiance, 
confidentially to a few devotees only, lest They came to the ears of atheists like 



Kamsa who might be betrayed into the offense of confounding Them with 
ordinary appellations of things of this world. The shloka of the Bhagavata 
embodying the statement of Garga on this subject, also contains one of the few 
direct explicit references to the Appearance of Krishna in the Kali Age. The 
shloka may be quoted at this place: ‘This Son of yours, O Nanda, assumes 
different Colours in the different Ages. His Colour is White in the Satya Age, 
Red in the Treta, and Gaura, i.e., Yellow tinctured with Red, in the Kali Age. His 
Colour in this present Age (Dvapara) is Black as you see . 5 

On the occasion of naming a baby there is an old custom of putting to the 
newborn child a variety of articles to induce him to choose any of them, in order 
to ascertain the natural bent of the infant. In pursuance of this time- 
honoured custom a number of objects were held out to Nimai, such as unhusked 
rice, books, fried rice, cowrie, gold, silver, etc. Sree Jagannath Misra then 
called upon the Child to choose whichever of them He liked. Nimai clasped 
the Bhagavatam tightly to His Bosom. Some said that it was a very good augury 
and prognosticated that the Child would be a great Pandit. Others said He would 
be a Vaishnava and would easily understand the meaning of the Scriptures. 

The preference shown for the Bhagavatam by Nimai may be explained as 
meaning that the acquisition of the riches of this world and even the maintenance 
of the body should not be valued for their own sake and that the unalloyed 
service of the Lord, which is expounded in the Bhagavata, is the one thing 
needful and includes all the rest. 

This old custom may be interpreted as supplying a clue to another matter of 
importance. Why was it necessary for the father, the natural guardian of 
the infant, to try to ascertain the tendency of his new-born Child? If the boy 
had chosen gold and silver, or fried rice, what inference would be drawn? 

Would such inference have any effect on the future of the Boy? If the son of 
a Brahmana is supposed to possess the nature of a Brahmana by reason of 
seminal birth, why should he be again subjected to a further test based on a 
different principle? How was the varna (disposition) of a Brahmana really 
settled in very old times? In the case of Nimai it was comparatively easy by the 
above test to arrive at a favourable conclusion. The Bhagavatam has been 
declared to be the exposition of the holy Gayatri, the mantram, the knowledge of 
which is essential for the Brahmana. The choice of the Bhagavatam by Nimai, 
therefore, clearly would mark Him out as possessing the natural disposition of 
a Brahmana. 



If seminal birth had been sufficient by itself to confer the varna of a Brahmana, 
there would have been no meaning of the ceremony of spiritual purification 
by Gayatri; nor would the latter process be significantly styled the second birth. 
The texts support the view that the varna of a Brahmana has to be fixed by 
natural disposition. There is also no text that attaches exclusive value to the 
seminal birth for the ascertainment of natural disposition. There are also many 
actual cases of the condition (varna) of a Brahmana having been acquired by 
persons who were not born in Brahmana families. Conversely we find that all the 
sons of a Brahmana did not necessarily become Brahmanas in every case. The 
varna of the one hundred sons of Rshabha Deva was settled by their 
respective dispositions. Some of them were found to be Kshatriyas, some were 
recognized as Brahmanas, while many were declared to be Vaishyas. The status 
of each was settled by the Father Who is Avatara of the Divinity. The bad effects 
and futility of trying to fix the spiritual status (varna) of a Brahmana by birth 
alone are most vividly brought out in the career of Prahlada on whom his 
father Hiranyakashipu tried forcibly to impose his own creed and occupation 
with the help of 'hereditary 5 preceptors. 

The effects of heredity and education in forming one’s disposition are 
overvalued by those who try to deduce everything from them. Heredity itself is a 
complex matter and runs backward in an endless ramification of 
ancestry through father and mother. No empiric pronouncement on the basis of 
heredity can be made, unless the nature of the whole of these two series is 
definitely known. Education, in so far as it tries to artificially widen our 
worldly experience, is also most uncertain in its operation on disposition. 

Seminal birth has been considered by the most ambitious of its modern empiric 
protagonists as decisive in settling one’s physical and mental disposition that are 
closely interconnected. In our old Scriptures seminal birth as well as secular and 
even empiric knowledge of the Scriptures are categorically differentiated from 
the Gayatri birth and the transcendental knowledge respectively. The latter 
is nowhere declared as capable of being derived, or even helped in any way, 
by the former. The natural disposition of a Brahmana, that is conferred by 
the purificatory ceremony of the Gayatri mantram, and the 
transcendental knowledge, that is the result of initiation by the spiritual 
preceptor, refer to the soul and have nothing to do with the secondary enveloping 
disposition that manifests itself, when the soul is engrossed in, z'.e., incompatibly 
associated with, matter. Brahmanahood, according to the Mahabharatam, means 
the condition of a person possessing the disposition that seeks to realize the 
nature of the soul and accordingly the status of a Brahmana should be conferred 



only on those persons in whom such disposition manifests itself, and by no 
other consideration. 

The spiritual status of the Brahmana cannot be tested and settled By any one 
who does not himself possess the realized Brahmana disposition, that is to 
say, by no one except the spiritual preceptor. The purificatory rite is 
the authoritative recognition by the Guru of the possession of such disposition 
by the disciple. The recognition by the Guru also serves to bring into play 
the spiritual disposition. By mechanically mimicking the external rite, 
only confusion is caused, as it has been caused in the past, and is being still 
caused, by the unprincipled ambitions of men who are inordinately proud of 
their high lineage and worldly qualities. Unless the superior status corresponds 
to the internal disposition there can be no proper subordination of the worldly to 
the spiritual interest which is sought to be effected by the 
varnashrama organization under the lead of the Brahmanas. This settlement of 
the status (varna) of a person was made soon after the birth of a child with the 
help of competent persons in order to provide specific training suited to the 
particular nature of the new-born child, for inclining him towards the spiritual 
life from the very beginning of his worldly sojourn. This may sound far too 
advanced an arrangement to be achieved in such remote antiquity which modern 
history teaches us, on no conclusive evidence, to regard as having been 
universally utterly backward and benighted. Spiritual enlightenment is an eternal 
affair and has always possessed the inclination as well as capacity of organizing 
the spiritual community in its minutest details for helping the realization of 
the theistic ideal. The weakness, that is nowadays noticeable in the 
historical organization of caste which is regarded as the residual legatee of 
the varnashrama organization, is due to atheistical preponderance. As the 
spiritual life slackened its manifestation in this world, the varnashrama 
organization was increasingly neglected and was replaced by the meaningless, 
cumbrous and effete cast system. The pseudo-spiritual organization, viz., caste, 
failed to withstand the persevering onslaughts of organized materialism by 
means of its proper agents in the shape of the utterly barbarous tribes possessing 
no spiritual tradition, that dwelt beyond the Indian borderland, who 
banded together for the purpose of overthrowing a decayed spiritual society. 

The morale of the Indian people had been completely undermined by the rise of 
the pseudo-religious systems and practices and by the atheistic speculations of 
the philosophers, that have already been noticed briefly in a previous chapter. 


After India had been subjugated by the brute force of these foreign invaders, 



attempts were made from time to time by the Vaishnava Acharyas to revive 
the theistic life in this country, against very great odds, in which they were 
not, however, permanently successful. This theistic reaction reached its 
culmination in the Activities of Sree Chaitanya Who propounded the 
comprehensive system, that provides the true remedy for all the ills of the world, 
resting on the broad base of the whole body of the spiritual Scriptures. The 
world is, however, not yet prepared to accept His Teaching in its entirety, 
although the leading scholars of all the centres of culture in India of His day 
were decisively vanquished in a series of open controversies. A great literature 
embodying the true scriptural doctrines was produced and the rejuvenated 
worship of Godhead was organized and provided with a considerable number 
of establishments in the form of the noblest shrines. The world was 
externally shaken by the mighty impulse, but failed to recover from its inner 
stupor and continued to drift aimlessly under the pilotage of professors of open 
and concealed atheism who quickly recovered their lead and even exploited 
the elaborate form of the caste organization that professes to represent 
the varnashrama institution of the Scriptures, for the propagation of atheism. 
After the arrival of the Europeans, through the agencies of the newly- 
established secular universities and an organized industrial and commercial 
system, the people have been further inoculated with the secular outlook of 
materialistic civilization of a most thorough-going type. This new outlook is 
unhesitatingly distrustful of existing social and religious systems of the country 
and is desirous of real reform but is far too materialistic in itself not to hesitate 
to welcome the Teaching of Sree Chaitanya, which is based on the Scriptures 
and which favours the rejuvenation of the theistic varnashrama organization 
of society. 

This digression, if such it may perchance appear to be to the patient reader, from 
the regular track of our narrative, is necessary in order to prevent misconceptions 
regarding the Activities of the Infant Chaitanya which are quoted by His pseudo¬ 
followers of the present day in justification of their adoption of the current 
atheistical practices of the smarta caste organization. The associates of Sree 
Chaitanya, however, arrived at a very different conclusion, that has been stated 
above, from the Acts of the Lord Himself as the Supreme Teacher by His Own 
Conduct. 

Nimai retained His habit of indulging in frequent fits of crying and would not be 
consoled by any of the methods that are usually effective in the case of ordinary 
children. He did not cry for having anything of this world. He used to cry in 



order to make those around Him chant constantly the Name of Hari. Nimai 
would laugh and dance in the mother’s lap at the sound of the kirtan of Hari with 
such extraordinary Grace of Expression and Movement of His Limbs that those, 
who chanted the Name of Hari to please Him, did so for their own pleasure. 
Those who are obstinately incredulous about the authenticity of the facts of 
religious history, need not reject these on the plea of want of contemporary 
evidence. They were faithfully put into writing by the eternal companions of 
Sree Chaitanya and none of the numerous enemies and opponents of Sree 
Chaitanya of that or subsequent Age ever thought of contradicting them on the 
ground that they were the concoctions of the imagination which should be 
impossible in the case of a series of great writers, unless they deliberately 
conspired for stating and accepting as facts the products of their mesmerized 
imaginations. 

Neither can we altogether admire the judgment of those secular historians who 
may be disposed to regard them as trivial and the explanations of them 
offered by the associates and followers of Sree Chaitanya, as laboured after¬ 
thoughts. 

To the candid reader the least of these so-called trifles and laboured 
afterthoughts may perchance possess more value for the real weal and woe of 
mankind in a proportion that is inversely proportional to the 
cumulative blighting influence of all the empirical accounts that have ever been 
written of the authentic deeds of the mighty heroes of this world. 

Godhead, when He chooses to sport as Infant, is more fully Divine than when He 
plays the open role of the Supreme Ruler by His Omnipotence of all 
these countless worlds. His Activities in either case are, however, 
alike incomprehensible to the perverted understanding of the conditioned soul 
who is averse to His service. No Tittle of such Activities has also the least 
chance of suffering any exaggeration by any amount of our poor and misdirected 
human praise that may be wrongly lavished upon it. The praise of them that 
is practiced by the devotees is the only method of enabling us to realize their 
most wonderful and exclusive fitness for all true praise. This is the kirtan of 
Krishna and it was this Truth Whom Infant Nimai constantly tried to impress on 
His attendants through their realized experience of Him, by making them 
sing constantly the kirtan of Hari without offense, i.e., in order to please the 
Lord Himself. This is the central subject of the Teaching of Sree Gaursundar, 
and its importance and early manifestation have accordingly been noted with 



reverent admiration by those who had been enabled by the Grace of Sree 
Chaitanya to realize the Highest Truth to Whose service the jiva can aspire to 
attain by the loving service of the Truth Himself. 

Lord Visvambhar now exhibited the Pastime of moving about on His Knees in 
the yard of Sachi. He sped about on His Knees with the most enchanting 
art, while the tiny bells on His Waistband made a most delicious music. He 
roved over the yard most fearlessly and grasped at everything that He saw, 
whether it was the fire or the venomous serpent. 

One day while thus roaming the yard, Nimai actually caught hold of a huge 
serpent that had found its way into the house. At the touch of the Child’s 
Hand, the brute immediately coiled up. Viswambhar then quietly laid Himself 
down on the soft cushion of its coils. The sight of this sent a thrill of horror into 
the hearts of all who beheld it. In their utter dismay and helplessness they 
called upon Garuda to save the Child. The parents with many others set up a wail 
of great agony. Nimai laughed as He lay couched on the coils of the monster. 

The lamentations of the onlookers at last induced the serpent to move off of its 
own accord. The Son of Sree Sachi pursued the retreating brute with the intent 
of catching it again. They dashed at the Child and brought Him away and 
pressed Him tightly to their bosoms. All the ladies blessed the Child saying, 

‘May Thou live for ever’. Some tied protective amulets, some recited texts of 
benediction, while some fetched the Feet-wash of Vishnu and sprinkled His body 
therewith. Some said that the Boy was born a second time. Some said that the 
serpent happened to be of the particular species that did no harm, which was the 
reason why His life was saved. Gaursundar only went on laughing and 
frequently essayed to make after the track of the serpent and was as often 
anxiously brought back by all the people. 

The relation of all fearful objects to the Lord is the exact opposite of their 
relation to the jiva: Godhead is the Source of all fear. He is fear 
Himself. Mahakala, the Destroyer of all things, is afraid of Him. Those who love 
the Lord are not, therefore, afraid of anything. Those, who do not trust the Lord 
and think that the various dreadful objects are not afraid of Him, are 
necessarily afraid of them. All such fear is condemnable for the reason that it has 
no reference to Godhead and is, therefore, due to the anxiety for one’s 
worldly safety. This looking away from Godhead to one’s false self is the cause 
of all fear and is the reason why such fear is also sordid. The fear of Sachi and 
Jagannath and of the assembled people for the safety of Nimai does not belong 



to the category of such sordid fear and is, therefore, an event that deserves to 
be recorded and was also exhibited by them, by the beneficent contrivance of 
the Spiritual Power of the Lord, to teach the proper use of the instinct of fear to 
all ungodly conditioned souls. 

Besides providing the opportunity of service to those devotees who did not 
know, by the force of the beneficent spiritual Power, that He was 
Godhead Himself, Sree Gaursundar also contrived to receive by this method the 
perfect homage of the most highly beloved of His fully conscious 
transcendental servitors whom He wanted to specially favour. Fire and the 
serpent, that were the causes of the consternation of friends and relatives, were 
respectively the god who identifies himself with the element of fire and Sree 
Ananta Deva Who is the Plenary Form of Sree Samkarsana and Who serves as 
the Couch of the Supreme Lord. Sree Gaursundar chose to receive their service 
for the purpose of His Pastime on this occasion. The pervert yogi only deludes 
the people by his display of seeming immunity from mundane fire and serpent in 
juggling imitation of these Acts of the Lord. Their exhibitions tempt other 
atheistical people like themselves to follow the method of the astanga yoga for 
the profane attainment of powers of apparent mastery over Nature. There are 
also people who are disposed to class Sree Chaitanya and His devotees with 
these pseudoyogis and explain also Their Performances by the possession of 
improper yogic powers. But as a matter of fact the display of the pseudo-yogic 
power is no part of the function of the pure soul taught and practiced by Sree 
Chaitanya and His associates. The power which the pervert yogi imagines as 
belonging to himself being acquired by his own meritorious endeavours, is a 
penal delusion which is as condemnable as the attempt of acquiring any other 
form of worldly power. It happens to possess the appearance of a superhuman 
entity in degree and measure, but is, as a matter of fact, only a still more 
objectionable form of selfish material enjoyment and only a potent means of 
self-deception or godlessness. For this reason, those, who try to understand the 
Doings of Sree Gaursundar and His devotees from the point of view of the 
astanga yoga, obtain, as the due punishment of their selfish labours, a further 
increase of aversion to Godhead. 



Chapter 5 Boyhood 


And now the Son of Sree Sachi Devi began to toddle on His tender legs. These 
pedestrian performances with uncertain steps were confined to the yard of 
Sree Sachi. The Child constantly moved about in the yard. Every limb of the 
Boy was most exquisitely beautiful. His Face was the envy of the Moon. His 
Head was beautifully rounded. A profusion of fine curls gracefully clustered 
round the Forehead. His Eyes were remarkably wide, resembling the petals of 
the lotus-flower. These reminded one of the Appearance of Boy-Krishna His 
long Hands hang down to the Knees. The Tips were crimson. His Bosom was 
wide and possessed of every auspicious feature. The whole Form of Gaura had a 
most pleasing yellowish tint that matched Him to perfection. His Fingers, Hands 
and Feet were particularly beautiful. While the Ford tripped about in the 
haphazard fashion of children, the mother used to get alarmed, as it seemed to 
her that blood came out of the delicate Feet of the Boy as They pressed lightly 
on the ground. 

The parents were unspeakably happy. They felt and whispered to each other that 
a great Personage was born in the family, which ensured deliverance 
of themselves and the family from the bondage of this world. These high hopes 
of the parents were confirmed by the peculiarity that the Child fell to crying if 
He did not hear the sound of the Name of Hari. He was the very Embodiment 
of Joy, whenever the Name of Hari was chanted to Him by clap of hand, 
and would express His gladness by unceasing laughter and dancing as long as 
the Name of Hari continued to be sung. This circumstance drew all the ladies of 
the neighbourhood into the house from early dawn, who formed themselves into 
a merry ring round Gaursundar and performed the samkirtan with clap of 
hand. The attentive Boy danced, rolled on the ground gray with dust, and, 
climbing into the lap of mother, burst into merry peals of laughter. He danced 
with such charming poses of the limbs that it filled all the onlookers with 
inexpressible delight. The Ford in this artless manner of childhood made all of 
them perform the kirtan of Hari: but they did not understand it. 

As the Boy grew up He began to manifest great restlessness of disposition and 
constantly sped in and out of the house. He would frequently leave the 
house unattended and would beg from the passers-by fried rice, plantain, 
sweetmeats, and, in fact, whatever eatables they happened to be carrying. The 
extraordinary Beauty of the Boy softened everybody towards Him, and perfect 



strangers gave Him, as soon as they saw Him, whatever He asked. No sooner did 
He obtain any gift than He ran into the house with the greatest joy and gave it to 
those ladies who chanted the Name of Hari. Such precocity of the Child made 
all persons laugh with great delight, and they would continue to chant the 
Name of Hari with clap of hand. The Lord often left the house in this manner at 
all hours of the day and even in the evenings. 

That the Holy Name of Godhead should be sung constantly, to the exclusion of 
every other activity, is a proposition that is repeatedly enjoined by the Scriptures, 
although it may appear at first sight to be impracticable. The mercenary preacher 
accepts a pecuniary remuneration for his exertions in delivering the Word of God 
on the ground that he must have something to live upon. How can the Name of 
Godhead be taken night and day without exposing oneself to sure starvation? 

The physical needs of the body compel every mortal to devote a part of his time 
to activities of this world. It may be urged with apparent reasonableness that the 
worldly activity for earning a livelihood is imperative and cannot be neglected 
by anybody in this world, whether he is a prince or a peasant, an atheist or a 
preacher of the Word of God. Therefore, the declaration of the Scriptures, that 
the chanting of the Name of Godhead at all time is the only function of every 
soul, requires to be liberally interpreted in its application to the people of this 
world. The impracticability is perfectly clear and simple and can be understood 
even by a child. It is not possible that this obvious difficulty should have been 
overlooked and overruled by the numerous Scriptural declarations, unless for a 
very good reason. That reason is also quite plain and may be briefly stated as 
follows. Godhead Himself has the Power and the Will to provide for the 
maintenance of those who devote themselves wholeheartedly, night and day, to 
the performance of the kirtan of Himself. Wherefore, it is expressly forbidden in 
the Scriptures to sell the Word of God in exchange for anything. If a person, who 
sets up as a preacher of the Word of God, makes of it a trade for the maintenance 
of himself and his family, for lacking the necessary faith in the promise of 
Godhead that he need not think for his own maintenance, he thereby commits an 
act of disobedience against Godhead and by reason of such sinfulness becomes 
unfit to receive or still less convey to others the Holy Word of the Lord. 

Sree Chaitanya taught that the Name of Godhead should be taken at all time with 
patience and humility. The patience consists in practicing perfect reliance on the 
Word of God. The humility consists in giving up all thought of selfish enjoyment 
and accepting the desire to please and obey Godhead as the only object of one’s 
serving activity. These considerations supply the real explanation of the 



otherwise mysterious Behaviour of the Divine Child. Godhead Himself procures 
the necessaries for the maintenance of every one who devotes himself to the 
chanting of the Name of God,—declare the Scriptures. The level of conduct of 
all preachers should come up to this cardinal fact of spiritual practice, if they 
expect to make their hearers believe, or make themselves believe, in the Truth of 
the Scriptures. Dancing and singing are forbidden to the Brahmanas, i.e., to 
those who know Godhead, except to serve the pleasure of Godhead and His 
devotees. The Brahmanas alone, who abstain from singing and dancing for any 
worldly purpose, are not only fit, but it is their duty to dance and sing the kirtan 
of Hari for pleasing Godhead and His devotees. 

Nimai now set Himself to carrying out in a systematic manner a series of 
reckless depredations in the households of the friends of the family who 
resided in the neighbourhood. He took to thieving and it was His daily pastime 
to steal something or other. He would stealthily drink the milk of one household, 
eat the cooked rice of another without notice, or, if He could obtain nothing to 
eat, He would break the earthen cooking pots, of a third home. He would poke 
the babies put to sleep and make them cry, beating a hasty retreat the moment 
He was detected. If anybody chanced to catch Him at His tricks, He would fall 
at his feet and express repentance. 'Let Me go this time. I won’t come again. I 
give My Word to you that I won’t steal again., Every one was astonished at 
such precocity of the little Child. No one was ever angered by these freaks; on 
the contrary, they all loved Him. Nay, they loved Him far more tenderly than 
they loved their own children. He stole away every faculty of the heart at the 
very first sight. The Divine Child took His pleasure in such extreme 
naughtinesses. 

The Favour of God bears no resemblance to the favour that is expected from or 
conferred by worldly persons. We desire, by everything we do, only 
the gratification of our own senses in a gross or subtle form. When, therefore, 
we want to favour anybody, we naturally suppose that the only means of doing 
this is by providing him with the means of his sensuous gratification. 'All the 
ills that flesh is heir to, are traceable to this inveterate self-indulging principle 
of our conditioned nature. The elaborate social machinery, with its so- 
called ethical codes, has been devised for the express purpose of augmenting 
each man’s average share of worldly enjoyment. 

But we are all of us more or less conscious of the wild-goose chase character of 
the pursuit of all worldly enjoyments. The causes of disappointment are many. 



Our hopes are never fully realized. The bliss, that we promise ourselves, 
invariably palls on its seeming attainment. We are perpetually oppressed with the 
sense of some besetting evil that poisons everything we desire to taste in the very 
act of tasting. We may be temporarily dazzled by worldly performances; but the 
inevitable dross is sure to discover itself in the long run in the most promising 
deeds of our lives. There is always this skeleton in the cupboard. The tragedies 
and comedies of worldly life alike repel us in the end by their grossness and 
triviality. Those, who consider it heroic to put a good face on the inevitable, 
thereby only display their disinclination to honestly tackle the issue that 
confronts them all the same, The attitude of patience for the inevitable, which 
appeals so strongly to the so-called practical temperament, is tantamount to an 
avoidance to think on the solution a besetting problem under the tacit plea that 
one’s duty is done by simply shutting one’s eye to the inexplicable side of one’s 
conduct. 

But it is only a display of thoughtless egotism that imagines the presence of 
adverse circumstances and their abundance in this world for which the person 
himself is not in any way responsible. This attitude is both dishonest and 
shallow. It means only that one should consider it his duty to move heaven and 
earth for securing his own enjoyment and, after having secured a fair share of it, 
when he finds that it does not answer his purpose, must still go on advocating 
The wisdom of such course and shut his eyes to the real worthlessness of such 
policy. This attitude is possible only when a person is too much enamoured of 
the sensuous life despite its utterly disappointing quality. The faculties of the 
mind of such a person are viciously attracted towards hollow worldly 
advantages. He is so completely engrossed in his contemplation that he has 
neither time nor inclination to look to the other side. 

To such people the conduct of the Boy Nimai would appear to be not at all 
different from that of ordinary naughty children who often turn into moral men 
and women on attaining the age of discretion and whose childish 
vices, therefore, are a mere result of the exuberance of their animal spirit and 
should not be put in the same category with the objectionable vices of grown¬ 
up people. Even this sort of moral condonation of childish vices 
seems unnecessary to a school of thinkers who are disposed to give every child a 
long rope in order to enable him to develop freely all sides of his nature. 
According to this school, a virile and aggressive personality in the worldly sense 
is better than a regulated and cramped one. The conduct of Gaursundar and His 
parents may, therefore, meet with the worldly approval of people of this stamp. 



But the attitude that the associates of Sree Gaursundar want us to realize in 
regard to these Activities of the Lord is different from what are recommended by 
both the above views. The depredations that are committed against our worldly 
‘possessions’ by Godhead are of the nature of His Special Favour. This becomes 
self-evident, as soon as they are understood as proceeding directly from the Will 
of the Lord. In the cases we are considering just now, this latter condition was 
supplied automatically by the fact that the mischievous Acts of the Child were 
actually liked by those persons against whom they were committed by the Lord 
Himself and were liked because of their connection with the Lord. If we love a 
frail mortal child, the imperfections of the object of our passion prevent the 
sentiment from acquiring the permanence that is its due and without which its 
full requirement is not satisfied. Hence the love of average worldly people for 
their children is unsure and shallow and cannot, by the very nature of its 
imperfection, extend to other children or even to all acts of one’s own child. If 
one sets himself deliberately to love all little children without reservation, he 
will be rightly charged with trying to do something that is unnatural and 
fictitious. Such affection has no real basis to stand upon. We want to love our 
children from a natural impulse which is baulked of its satisfaction by the 
unworthiness of the object to which it is directed. There was no cause of any 
such disappointment in the case of their love for Sree Gaursundar, as He is, 
indeed, Godhead Himself. Hence, says the Bhagavatam, ‘all the faculties really 
succeed in obtaining what they seek only when they are directed towards 
Godhead.’ This overwhelming attractiveness also supplies an indirect proof of 
the Perfect Personality of the Supreme Lord. 

An incident, of these Infant days is thus recorded by Krishnadas Kaviraj 
Goswami. One day Sachi brought a vessel full of fried rice and sweetmeats 
and gave it to Nimai, asking Him to sit down and eat the same. Sachi then left 
Him to attend to household work. The Boy, however, began to eat raw earth 
by avoiding any notice. Sachi, however, perceived this and came running to 
the Child with expostulations of disapproval, snatched the earth from the Boy 
and asked Him why He preferred it to the other eatables. The Child burst into 
tears. ‘Why are you angry?’ He said, ‘How am I to blame? It is you who gave 
Me the earth to eat. Fried rice, sweetmeats, cooked rice, etc., are all 
transformations of earth. This, which I am eating, is earth; those are also earth. 
Why do you consider them to be different? This body is of earth; its food is also 
earth. Consider this well. I am helpless, if you blame without reflection.’ Sachi 
was very much surprised in her heart at such reply. ‘Who taught you,’ she said, 
‘to eat earth by the barren policy of intellectualists ? The body is nourished only 



by eating cooked rice which is a transformation of earth. If raw earth is 
eaten, disease is produced and the body is destroyed thereby. We fetch water in 
a pitcher which is a transformation of earth. If we put water on a lump of clay, 
it soaks and dries up., The Child said, ‘Why did you not tell Me this before? 

I shall no more eat earth now that I know. When I feel hungry, I shall suck 
your breast? And, saying this, the Boy smiled and climbed to the lap of mother 
and began to suck. These revelations of Supreme Power were constant and 
various. They were secured against recognition by the display of childishness 
that followed and served to blind everybody’s judgment. 

Sree Sachi Devi did not evidently belong to the school of empiric abstractionists 
who deny Godhead the power of real manifestation and real creation, 
regarding the latter as temporary, unwholesome and illusive and, therefore, 
impossible of being in any way related to perfect Godhead. Sachi Devi, on the 
contrary, believed in the relationship of simultaneous unity and diversity of 
Power with Possessor of Power and was not prepared to ignore qualitative 
differences that really exist between the fried rice and raw earth, after the 
manner of the Buddhists or believers in the Undifferentiated Abstract Negation 
as Brahman. Child Nimai was more easily converted to the, creed of His mother 
by her effective protest than falls to the lot of the average Mayavadin. 

One day as the Child was roaming in the town as usual by Himself and with 
ornaments on all parts of His Body, He attracted the attention of two thieves who 
thought on a plan of robbing His ornaments. Accordingly, one of them with 
sweet words took up the Lord into his arms, saying that they had been searching 
for Him and would take Him home. The Lord at once consented to their proposal 
and was carried on their shoulders a long distance through intricate lanes 
towards the place where the nefarious deed was to be perpetrated with safety and 
secrecy. Those thieves endeavoured all this time to keep Nimai in humour by 
sweet words and the offer of prospective sweetmeats. While the Lord was being 
thus hurried off to their rendezvous, the members of His family missed Him and 
began to search in all directions, but could find the Boy nowhere. A great fear 
gradually took possession of their minds. Meanwhile the thieves had been led by 
the Deluding Power of Vishnu into taking the road to the Home of Jagannath 
Misra, under the impression that it led to their own place and, on their arrival at 
Misra’s house, felt quite sure that they had successfully reached their destination. 


They accordingly made the Boy descend from their shoulders just where 
Jagannath Misra and the friends and relations of the family were sitting in 



silent grief, apprehending a great calamity. Nimai at once ran into the arms of 
His father and all present shouted ‘Hari, Hari’ in the joy of a great relief, as if 
Life Himself was restored to their bodies. The thieves looked foolish and 
perplexed and were very much frightened when they found out that it was not 
their own place. Thereupon availing of the confusion caused by the arrival of 
Nimai they made good their escape. 

They did not stop till they felt that they were out of the reach of any possible 
pursuers. They were amazed by the nature of their adventure and thought 
that they had been under the spell of a black magician and had been saved only 
by the grace of goddess Chandi whom they worshipped. They hugged each 
other in a close embrace in their ecstasy of joy at their Providential escape. As 
a matter of fact, it was also no ordinary good luck that had provided them 
an opportunity of carrying Nimai on their shoulders. 

Here, at the house of Jagannath Misra, after the first outburst of joy had 
subsided, they began to look about for the person who had brought Nimai home 
with the object of rewarding him by the present of a head-dress. This was a piece 
of cloth which they wanted to tie round his head with their own hands. But 
although it transpired that two men had actually brought the Child on 
their shoulders, no one came forward to claim the reward. Nimai was questioned 
and declared that He had gone to the bank of the Bhagirathi and had been 
brought on the shoulders of two strangers by paths that were unknown to Him. 
The people arrived at the conclusion that it was an instance of what the 
Scriptures declare, viz., that children, old men and those who have nobody to 
look after them, are protected by the gods in the shape of luck. Thus thought 
they in their ignorance, unable to realize the significance of the occurrence by 
reason of the sportive intervention of the Power of Vishnu. Those, concludes 
Thakur Brindabandas, who listen to this story, which is one of the hidden 
narratives of the Scriptures, attain to firm devotion to the Feet of Sree Chaitanya. 

Vishnu’s Power possesses at one and the same time a double face. One of these 
confers the knowledge of the Divinity on one disposed to serve, the 
other obscures the spiritual vision and makes the jiva, who is averse to the 
service of Godhead, hanker for sensuous enjoyment. The jiva falls into the 
clutches of the latter, also called Maya if he makes the attempt to understand the 
Divinity by the resources of his own paltry intellect. In this instance the thieves 
were prevented by the Spiritual Energy to act in the wrong way, in spite of their 
bad intentions. The members of the family of Jagannath Misra were also 



prevented by the Spiritual Power, who supplies the conjunction of events 
forming the Leela of Godhead, from realizing the whole truth of the incident. 

The jiva possesses freedom of will but is lacking in the power of taking the 
effective initiative which belongs exclusively to Godhead. The jivas are made 
conscious of the Purpose of Godhead in what they are enabled to do, just in 
the proportion that is necessary for the Divine Purpose. Those, who rely on 
their own judgment for finding out the Divine Purpose, without desiring to 
receive the knowledge of it from Himself, are guided by the Deluding Energy 
into wrong conclusions; but they are not themselves aware that their 
conclusions are wrong. 

This is, however, really opaque delusion. Those, who submit to receive their 
enlightenment from Godhead, are not thus deprived of the service of 
Godhead by the Deluding Power. In this instance it is not the Deluding Energy 
but the preventing Spiritual Power that relieved the thieves from their 
thievish propensity and sowed the seed for future service of the Divinity. Herein 
the thieves were really most fortunate. It could not be otherwise, as 
Godhead Himself is directly concerned. When thieves steal the property of 
worldly people, they are under the deluding Power who punishes those who 
desire to serve themselves instead of God by helping them to gain their object in 
the shape of the attainment of their selfish enjoyment. But stealth, which 
is contrived by the Spiritual Power to be directed apparently against God 
Himself for enhancing the charm of the Divine Leela, produces the best results 
in spite of the apparently evil intention of the person who attempts to rob Him, if 
the thief is not really anxious to go consciously against Godhead. In the case 
even of demon Ravana, who apparently succeeded in robbing Sita Devi, the 
illusion of his apparent success operated for his benefit by his death at the Hands 
of Godhead Himself. 

From these instances we should be careful, however, not to draw the wrong 
conclusion and suppose that Godhead is apt to reward those who cherish 
evil intentions towards Himself for such offensive conduct. God rewards 
everybody impartially and fully. But the reward takes different forms according 
to the different antecedents of the recipients. In the case of the thieves, the 
stealth of God’s property was prevented; but of this they were not conscious and 
God was also served unconsciously by allowing Himself to be carried on their 
shoulders to His Own Home. In the case of Ravana, he was deluded by the 
Spiritual Power into the belief that he was successful in stealing Sita. He, 
however, stole only the delusive form of Sita. This proved a means of correction 



for Ravana, although he had planned his offense against good advice. He was 
punished by the Spiritual Power by the slaughter of himself with all his kindred 
and followers. Ravana was well aware that he was going against Godhead. He 
was more fortunate than the two thieves, because he was enabled to realize that 
he was punished for his offense and also the utter wickedness of opposing 
the Divine Will. The Power of Godhead is really One but acts consistently 
in opposite ways, accordingly as He is served or opposed. Her external face, 
which alone is open to the view of those who are opposed to Godhead, seems to 
be terrible and incalculable as long as they continue to be averse to God. 

Her benign face is seen only by those who are disposed to serve Godhead. 

The delusion of Jagannath Misra and his kindred and friends was 
absolutely wholesome, being of the nature of the benign operation of the 
Spiritual Power of Godhead in furtherance of the joy of His Divine Activities. 

One day Jagannath Misra called to his Son and asked Him to fetch his book from 
the inner apartment. As the Boy entered the room running, Misra and Sachi 
distinctly heard exquisitely sweet sounds as of jingling of bells of anklets that 
were produced by the quick movements of the Child. Presently Nimai came out 
with the required book and, making it over to His father, ran off for play. The 
parents were very much perplexed. There were no jingling anklets on the Feet of 
their Boy. Whence could the sound come? Their astonishment was changed to 
conviction as they went into the room. There they found, all over the room, 
prints of Feet marked with the signs of the banner, the bolt and the goad. They at 
once recognized the Foot-prints of Vishnu, and both of them instinctively 
exclaimed that there would be no more birth for them as they had a sight of those 
well-known Wonderful Divine Feet never seen by them before. They 
reverentially bowed to the foot-prints of Godhead. Misra naturally 
enough concluded that it was the act of Damodar Sila, i.e., the Salagram Sila 
who was the tutelary? Deity of the family and was regularly worshipped in the 
home. He thought that Gopala (Cow-boy Krishna) Who dwelt in the Salagram 
Sila walked about in the room, and the prints were of the Feet of Gopala. 

Misra decided to undertake personally the worship of Damodar Sila from that 
day and asked Sachi Devi to cook rice boiled in sweet milk mixed with ghee as a 
special offering to Damodar Sila next morning. Misra with his own hands bathed 
the Salagram Sila with the five holy products of the cow and, in the company 
of his pious consort, reverentially worshipped the Deity of the family. The 
Lord laughed in His mind at the conduct of His parents. 


Thereafter occurred a most wonderful event. A pilgrim Brahmana, who had done 



many pious deeds in his previous lives, was wont to wander all over the country 
in quest of Krishna. He worshipped the six-letter mantram of Gopala (Cow-boy 
Krishna) and ate nothing except such food as had already been offered to 
Gopala. By good fortune it so chanced that he arrived at the Lord’s House in 
course of his wanderings. The pilgrim Brahmana wore, as his cherished 
ornaments, the Holy Forms of Gopala and the Salagram Sila suspended from his 
neck. The whole person of the pilgrim was aglow with the spiritual radiance of 
the ideal Brahmana which can never be properly described in words. The mouth 
of the Brahmana constantly recited the Name of Krishna. His eyes were listless 
by the influence of the sweet quality of Govinda That possessed his heart. At the 
sight of the newly-arrived stranger-guest, Jagannath Misra, struck by the visible 
force of his personality, rising from his seat with respect, made obeisance to him. 
Misra then welcomed his guest with all due formality. He himself washed the 
feet of his guest and offered him his best seat. After the pilgrim was refreshed 
and properly seated, the good Misra inquired the place of his residence. To this 
the Brahmana replied that he was a recluse and wandered about through sheer 
restlessness of mind. Misra, bowing low, observed that the wanderings of such 
as he testified to the good fortune of the world which good fortune belonged to 
him that day, and, if commanded, he would make the necessary arrangements for 
his cooking of the meal for Krishna. 

The Brahmana, signifying his assent to the proposal of Misra, the latter with 
great pleasure proceeded to make all necessary preparations. He made ready 
the place of cooking by cleansing it with great care and brought thither all 
the articles required for cooking. The Brahmana, having cooked the meal with 
great satisfaction, sat down to make its offering to Krishna. 

No sooner did the Brahmana engage in the meditation of Krishna, than Sree 
Gaursundar appeared before him. The Body of the Child was full of dust 
and perfectly nude. His beautiful Eyes, Hands, and Feet were red. Smilingly He 
took up the food offered by the Brahmana with His beautiful Hand and, in the 
view of the worthy Brahmana, ate a mouthful. The fortunate Bipra shrieked in 
an agony of grief: That restless Boy has stolen my cooked rice.’ His cry 
quickly brought Jagannath Misra to the spot who found Sree Gaursundar in the 
very Act of eating the cooked rice with a smiling Countenance. 

Misra was greatly enraged and ran to administer his Son a sound thrashing. The 
pilgrim Brahmana got up in great fear and caught hold of the hand of Misra. 

He said that the Child had no knowledge of right and wrong. A wise man 



should never hurt such a one. He accordingly importuned Misra to do no 
violence to the Boy. Misra was very much dejected. The Brahmana said that 
there was no cause for grief; Godhead alone knows what is to happen on any 
day. ‘I would dine on any fruits, roots or such other food that may be in the 
house. Be pleased to give the same to me.’ But Misra would not hear. ‘If you 
indeed regard me as your servant’, he said, ‘be pleased to cook the meal once 
again. Allow me to make ready the place. I have got everything necessary for 
your cooking in the house. I shall, indeed, be very glad, if you cook once more.’ 
Other relatives and well-wishers of Misra joined in the entreaty. The importunity 
of so many persons had its effect and induced the pilgrim to agree to cook again. 

This time, in order to keep the Child out of harm’s way, Sachi Devi took Him to 
a neighbour’s house. The ladies did not forego such an excellent opportunity 
of reading a good lesson to the Child. ‘Well, Nimai’, they said, ‘You are so 
foolish that you ate the rice that was cooked by a stranger. You will be an outcast 
for this. What will you do now?’ The Boy laughed and made this strange answer, 
‘I am a cow-boy. I eat the rice cooked by Brahmanas at all time.’ He looked 
at them with an arch smile. The reply had its effect. They all burst into 
uproarious laughter and pressed the Child to their bosom. The Benign Spiritual 
Power of God prevented them from understanding the actual meaning of His 
words. 

That pilgrim Brahmana after cooking a second time sat down to make the 
offering to Krishna. He meditated on the Cow-boy Nimai again appeared 
before the pilgrim, having eluded the vigilance of all watchers, and ate a handful 
of the cooked rice which was duly perceived only by the Brahmana who at 
once shouted out with grief. This gave the alarm to Misra who detected the Boy 
as He ran away after eating the rice. Misra took up a stick and gave chase. But 
the Boy took refuge inside one of the rooms in great fear. Misra was not to 
be pacified by the entreaties of anybody. The pilgrim Brahmana himself 
again interposed. ‘Krishna’, he said, ‘has not allotted cooked rice for me to-day. 
This is the real truth, I tell you. The Boy is not to blame at all.’ This did not allay 
the poignant grief of Misra who remained silent and thoughtful. 

At this point Viswarup appeared on the scene. The beauty of His person was 
only equaled by His knowledge of all the Scriptures and His 
unbounded devotion to Krishna. The very sight of Viswarup was a revelation to 
the pilgrim who regarded His appearance with great attention and frequently 
looked at Him with unconcealed admiration. He inquired His parentage and 



warmly congratulated Misra on the possession of such a son. 


Viswarup made obeisance to the Brahmana. His words were extraordinarily 
sweet. He said that it was, indeed, very great good fortune that had brought 
a person who finds all his delight in his own soul as guest to their house. 

There could be no greater calamity than if this guest had to fast in the house 
against His will. He felt it a great grief, although He was very glad by seeing 
him. The Brahmana said that he lived in the forest and was habituated to a diet 
of roots and fruits. He felt amply rewarded by having the sight of Viswrarup. He 
would take any article of food that had been offered to Krishna. Viswarup said 
that a person like the pilgrim Brahmana naturally cared only for the happiness 
of others, in preference to his own. Viswarup was, therefore, emboldened to 
make the request that he would be pleased to cook a third time. The Brahmana 
said that the Will of Krishna in the matter was supreme and it had been very 
clearly declared. It was also almost midnight. He had already cooked twice. As it 
was not clearly the Will of Krishna that he should eat cooked rice that day, 
he entreated to be excused any further useless exertion and would accept 
fruits and roots as his repast for that night. 

But Viswarup fell at the feet of the Brahmana and repeated the entreaty of 
Himself and of the whole family that he would cook once again for the sake 
of Krishna. The pilgrim had been thoroughly bewitched by the Beauty and 
Grace of Viswarup. He willingly consented to cook a third time amidst the 
shouts of ‘Hari, Hari’ that were raised by all present. The place was quickly 
cleansed and everything was made ready for his cooking. 

This time very special care was taken to prevent further mischief by Nimai. He 
had already hidden Himself inside one of the rooms. On the advice of 
those present, Misra had the door of the room securely bound from outside. 

Misra himself guarded the entrance of the room. The ladies at last announced 
that there was no further cause for anxiety, as the Child had fallen asleep. But 
they did not relax their vigilance. 

At last the cooking of the Brahmana was finished, and, having arranged the 
meal, that Brahmana of excellent deeds, offered the same to Krishna 
in meditation. All the people had by this time fallen into a deep slumber. The 
Son of Sachi Devi again appeared on the spot where the Brahmana was making 
his offering of food to Gopala. On catching sight of the Boy the Brahmana made 
a great noise, but no one heard his cries. The Lord said, ‘Bipra! You are 



so generous! You ask Me to come. Is it My fault ? Repeating My mantram you 
call upon Me. Finding it impossible to stay away, I have thus come to you. 

You always long for My Sight. Wherefore, I show Myself to you.’ 

The Brahmana forthwith had a vision of the Wonderful Divine Form. The Figure 
had eight Arms which held the Conch, Disc, Club and the Lotus. There was 
butter in one of His Hands, which He ate with another. And the Lord played on 
the Murali (flute) with the other two Hands. A garland of jewels and the Gem 
Kaustuva adorned His Breast which was marked with footprints of Bhrigu. The 
Brahmana saw that precious ornaments decorated all parts of His Body. The tail 
of the peacock, set in the fresh twigs of gunja, adorned His Head. His red Lips 
added to the Beauty of His moonlike Face. He moved His Lotus Eyes smiling. 
The Vaijayanti Garland waved to and fro as also the Makara pendent hanging 
from His Ears. The charming Anklet (Nupura) of jewels adorned the Lotus Feet 
of the Lord. Darkness was flung back afar by the sheen of His gemlike Toe-nails. 
On the self-same spot the Brahmana also saw the wonderful Kadamba tree in 
Brindabana, alive with the sounds of birds. He saw the cowherds and milkmaids 
and cows on all sides. He had direct vision of everything on which he was wont 
to meditate. That :Brahmana of pious deeds swooned away with excess of joy on 
beholding splendours never seen before. 

Sree Gaursundar touched the body of the Brahmana with His Hand. The Touch 
of Divine Hand restored external consciousness to the Brahmana. He 
was rendered passive by joy, and no words came out of his mouth. He 
swooned away and fell on the ground repeatedly, but, recovering quickly, stood 
up as often as he fell. No part of his body could be composed by reason of 
shivering, sweat, horripilation; and tears from his eyes flowed in a stream like 
the sacred current of the Ganges. Presently the Brahmana clasped the Feet of the 
Lord and began to cry with a loud voice. 

On beholding the restlessness of the Brahmana, Sree Gaursundar smiled as He 
spoke to him briefly. The Lord said that The Brahmana is His servant in 
every birth and always thinks of having the Sight of Him. Therefore He had 
shown him His Form. He had formerly shown His same Form to the Brahmana 
in the home of Nanda, in another birth. The Brahmana had forgot it. On that 
previous occasion also when Sree Gauranga had been born in the village of 
the cowherds, the same Brahmana, pursuing his pilgrim-journeys as now, 
had accidentally become the guest in the home of Nanda, and the Lord then 
showed him the same Form by stealthily eating his cooked food while in the act 



of offering it to Krishna. Those, who are His servants like the Brahmana, 
are privileged to have the Sight of His Divine Form. He then told the Brahmana 
not to divulge those secrets to any one as long as He remained Manifest in 
this world. He also told the Brahmana that His Advent takes place at the 
beginning of the congregational chanting (samkirtan) and that He will spread 
the samkirtan to all countries. He will give away to every household the Holy 
Love which is coveted by the gods including Brahma. The Brahmana will live to 
see many of those Activities.’ With these words and assuring the Brahmana not 
to have any fears, the Lord returned to His own apartment, and there lay in 
His little bed as before, in the likeness of a child. By reason of deep slumber no 
one could know anything. 

The Brahmana was filled with supreme bliss on beholding the wonderful Divine 
manifestation. He besmeared his body with the cooked rice, cried as he 
ate, danced, sang, laughed and roared with delight. He repeatedly ejaculated 
‘jais’ to the Boy-Krishna (Gopala). The noise made by the Brahmana at last 
woke ;up everybody, when he restrained himself and finished his meal by the 
customary performance (achaman). 

The first impulse of the Brahmana was to make a clean breast of everything to 
all the people, so that they might be delivered by recognizing the Lord 
Whom they all believed to be but a mere mortal child. But he desisted from 
this rashness on remembering his promise made to the Lord not to 
divulge anything. This fortunate Brahmana thereupon took up his permanent 
abode in Nabadwip and daily visited his cherished Divinity at the home of 
Jagannath Misra on the conclusion of his day’s begging. 

The Beatific vision is different from ordinary seeing. The Brahmana thought that 
if only he proclaimed what he had actually seen to all the people, they would 
implicitly believe in his words and be saved by knowing the Infant Son of 
Jagannath Misra as the Lord of the world. This had been forbidden by 
Sree Gaursundar Himself in anticipation. Why did He forbid such disclosure ? 
The Lord had Himself told the Brahmana that His servants alone are privileged 
to have the Sight of the Divine Form. Those who are not the servants of 
Krishna do not see Him. Knowing Him is identical with seeing Him. Those that 
are not willing to serve Krishna see only a mortal child in the Son of Jagannath 
Misra. This hallucination can be removed only by the Lord Himself, because it is 
His Power that obscures their vision. Unless He allows them to see, they cannot 
see or know Him as He really is. But the Lord is not unkind to them. He is full 



of mercy for even those who do not want to serve Him. He does not show 
Himself to them, lest they are forced to serve Him through fear. He wants their 
willing service which alone can satisfy also themselves, because that is the 
really natural relationship between Krishna and jivas. 

This freedom of will conferred by Krishna on jivas, which, Therefore, forms a 
part and parcel of their nature, is allowed free scope by the Lord in order 
to enable jivas to attain the eternal, natural function of their souls by the 
process of free rational choice. He does not compel their choice to serve even 
Himself, against their freedom of will. But the jiva cannot sit idly. He must 
always serve to exist at all. Those, who do not like to serve Krishna, have to be 
made to serve their own deluded fancies. They hope to be able to avoid the 
service of Krishna by following their own selfish inclinations. Krishna freely 
allows them to make this experiment by providing the means for the seeming 
realization of their desire. 

His Deluding Energy creates this world for the purpose by His Will. Those jivas, 
who are averse to serve Krishna, find this world to contain more than an endless 
abundance of what they can conceivably want in such circumstance, viz., all 
varieties of means of their own selfish enjoyment. In the process of undergoing 
such enjoyment, they have nothing to do with Krishna as the only Master to be 
served. They are thus offered, in fulfillment of their own choice, the vision of 
that Potency of Krishna whose apparent function is to minister to their selfish 
pleasures. This is the deluding manifestation or non-Krishna which can alone be 
available to those who want to lord it over the Divinity. 

The Potency of Krishna, who thus appears to serve the erring fancies of disloyal 
souls, is the Deluding Power or Maya. When Krishna Himself comes down 
in His own proper Form into this world which is built for the above penal 
purpose by His Deluding Power, those jz'vas, who happen to be undergoing 
corrective enjoyment in this lower region, naturally take Him to be an object of 
this world like the other mundane entities that they know, which are of value to 
them solely because they minister to their trivial selfish enjoyment. All so- 
called service, that is so loudly advertised in this world, is only a method of 
procuring the good, i.e, enjoyable things of this world for oneself and other 
ungodly persons, for pleasing oneself. There is no place for the service of 
Krishna in the scheme of the selfish people of this world. The service of Krishna, 
the only Master, is not desired at all in this world. We want to be ourselves 
masters of everything including Krishna Himself if possible. Our lip-homage to 



Krishna is only a piece of pious hypocrisy. God does not perpetrate the anomaly 
of offering us a Master, Who can be no other than Himself, when we want to 
be served. This aversion is not due to ignorance, but is an innate disposition 
which is the result of the abuse of our freedom of will. It is only when the will of 
the jiva chooses to serve the Truth, i.e., Krishna, that Krishna shows His Form 
to him in order to receive his offered service. 

The Vision Beatific is, therefore, possible only for those who have attained the 
highest rung of the ladder of spiritual endeavour towards the 
unadulterated service of the Divinity. There are hypocritical visions of so-called 
Divinity which are an ordinary device of the pseudo-yogis for deluding those 
worldly people who desire to see ( ?) Krishna for the gratification of their senses. 

These pseudo-visions and miracles are by no means any infringement of the law 
of physical Nature. They come under the law of physical Nature or 
Deluding Energy as much as the ordinary events of mundane life. They are 
events of the mental plane. These mental powers can be obtained by the 
processes of pseudoyoga and are coveted by persons who are inordinately 
anxious to extend their scope of selfish enjoyment. These bad people naturally 
fall a victim to the pervert yogis who lead them to deeper depths of perdition by 
producing in their minds such impious hallucinations of mastery over the 
Divinity. Krishna has His Eternal Divine Form. But His Form is not like those 
images of God that are set up in the shrines of worldlings for the gratification of 
fallen jivas. The True Form of Krishna is All-pure and Spiritual and can, by His 
Nature, be seen only by those who are themselves free from all worldly taint. 
This caution of the Scriptures should serve as a much-needed warning to all 
educated and highborn people who are specially liable to accept the assurances 
of pseudo-yogis and pseudo-sadhus to be enabled to obtain the Sight ( ?) of the 
Divinity even in their sinful state. 

The process of spiritual progress has its strict gradations which bear a close 
analogy to those of mental progress. The really moral state is the 
natural condition of the jiva. An immoral or non-moral person is far worse than 
a brute. This moral condition is the highest ideal of his position conceivable 
by man as attainable by his empiric thinking and activities based thereon. 

The spiritual, indeed, transcends the ideal moral, but not in The sense that 
it transgresses against the so-called moral law, because by such transgression 
man is only degraded to the condition which is worse than even that of the 
bmte. The spiritual life enables us to realize the moral as a secondary result. 



The spiritual fulfills the moral ideal by transcending it. 


Morality can neither be understood nor perfected in practice by. the empiric 
efforts of man. Its ideal is attainment of perfect purity (?) of body and 
mind. This ideal, the Scriptures tell us, can be automatically attained, only if it 
is made a secondary, and not the primary, object of life, as it happens to be 
the case with all really immoral people. The perfection of morality is realized as 
a secondary consequence of serving Krishna and not as a reward of 
endeavours for the satisfaction of our senses in our temporary worldly sojourn. 

Those who serve Krishna are alone necessarily and perfectly moral or free from 
the evils of the flesh. Those, who are not perfectly moral in this real sense, 
are not spiritual at all and have no right of entry into Sree Brindavana 
the Transcendental Abode of the Divinity. But the Deluding Power of God 
misleads immoral people, through the agency of immoral yogis by showing them 
a false form resembling that of Godhead, as a means of punishing them for 
such impious desire of making God an object of the gratification of their senses. 

This punishment is a real mercy to such people and is intended to cure them of 
their rank atheism. It is, therefore, necessary to confront one’s so-called spiritual 
experiences with the authority of the Scriptures and the corroboration of real 
sadhus who do not desire to aggrandize themselves at our expense before they 
are admitted by our serving disposition as genuine. The unambiguous advice on 
such matters is obtainable only from Sreemad Bhagavatam and in the only 
intelligible form from the career of Sree Chaitanya as described by 
His associates, Who is the Living Embodiment of the Eternal Religion described 
in the Bhagavatam. The other Scriptures avoid the concrete presentation of 
the Truth, lest He be condemned or disbelieved by those who are 
deliberately averse to Him. 

The rationale of theism is furnished by the Vaishnava philosophy, which is 
unique in the world, in its positive aspect. The associates and loyal followers 
of Sree Chaitanya have left an ample exposition of the philosophy of the 
religion of the Bhagavata in the clearest possible language. But even so it is 
suicidal to attempt to understand the highest spiritual principles without 
availing ourselves of the aid that has been so mercifully placed within our reach 
by Godhead Himself. The attitude of neglect of the transcendental subject is 
often due to ignorance, prejudice and irreverence. The two former obstacles can 
be overcome only by one’s own endeavours; but the last is incurable except 



by Grace. There cannot well be a greater hypocrite than one who professes 
the desire of seeing Krishna but has no absolute regard for those perfectly 
loyal souls who admit no other legitimate function except the service of 
Godhead. It is for this sufficient reason that Godhead Himself has ordained that 
by submitting to His devotees, not once nor twice but constantly and 
eternally with body, mind and speech, that any one can have real access to His 
Presence. It is, however, this very dictum of the Scriptures, intended for 
ensuring devotion to Godhead, that is exploited by the knaves and atheists under 
the external garb of sadhus for passing off the different forms of pseudo-service 
on willing worldly people for the gratification of their diabolical 
atheistical purposes which are destructive of even ordinary morality. 



Chapter 6 Growing Boy 


The Lord occupied Himself with these Juvenile Pastimes after the manner of 
Gopala (Cow-Boy Krishna). Meanwhile the proper time for the performance 
of the ceremony of making the Boy begin His studies, having arrived, 

Jagannath Misra chose an auspicious day and moment for ‘putting the writing- 
chalk into the Hands of his Boy to initiate Him into the art of reading, writing 
and arithmetic. This is one of the ten purificatory ceremonies enjoined by the 
Scriptures as necessary to be observed by the Brahmanas. 

Some time after the ceremony, all friends of the family gathered together to 
perform the next purificatory rites, viz., perforation of the ears and tonsure. 

The perforation of the ears is to make possible hearing of the Word of Godhead 
or the attainment of the fitness of listening to words regarding the highest good, 
as distinct from ordinary non-spiritual utterances. The making of the tuft known 
as The tongue of fire' in the Vedas or subsequently as Teaching of 
Sree Chaitanya’ (Sree Chaitanya siksha), is another of the ten lustrations. 

Mayavadins (illusionist-Monists), who believe in non-activity, admit the value of 
the tuft only in the sphere of work which is illusory and, accordingly, in the long 
run, shave off the tuft on renouncing all activity. But the Vedic 
theistic renunciation of the triple staff (tridanda) does not dispense with the tuft 
which, in this case, is emblematic of progress in the sphere of the service of 
Godhead, even in the stage of sannyasa. 

Sree Chaitanya read all the letters of the Alphabet at the first sight, to the 
amazement of everybody. He finished all the compound-letters in two or three 
days and began to write constantly the series of the Names of Krishna. He wrote 
and read aloud, night and day, with the greatest ardour, the Holy Names of 
Rama, Krishna, Murari, Mukunda, Vanamali, etc. The fortunate people of Nadia 
actually saw the Lord of Vaikuntha reading in the company of their children. The 
sweetness with which the Lord articulates the letters has power to steal the hearts 
of all jiuas, if they have only a chance of listening to Him. 

Sree Gaursundar engaged in diverse kinds of strange frolics, and His demands 
were always most difficult to satisfy. He would ask to have the bird which 
flew across the sky and the moon and stars of the firmament, and would 



cry violently, rolling in the dust and dashing His hands and legs against 
the ground, if His wishes were not fulfilled. All present would take Him up 
into their arms to console Him, but Viswambhar always proved intractable and 
went on crying, 'I must have it’. There was only one sovereign remedy to stop 
Him. He was hushed the moment He heard the Name of Hari. All of them 
recited aloud the Name of Hari by clap of hand. This at once quieted the Child 
Who forgot all His turbulence. They chanted the Name of Hari to please the Boy 
and the home of Jagannath was turned into the realm of Vaikuntha. 

It is necessary to guard against a possible error. That which is not the Abode of 
Godhead should not be supposed to be convertible into the same by chanting the 
Name of Hari. Such speculation, theologically dubbed as 
‘transubstantiation’ applies only to mental and physical phenomena. The non¬ 
spiritual is never turned into the spiritual. Godhead dwells eternally in the pure 
spiritual essence which is the manifestation of His Spiritual Power, eternally 
distinct from the play of His Deluding Energy. The home of Jagannath Misra, in 
which the Lord appears, is never within the jurisdiction of the Deluding Power 
of Godhead. 

One day Nimai began to cry violently. The Child was not quieted even by the 
chant of the Name of Hari, but kept on crying. After even, method of 
consoling the Boy had failed, they implored Him to tell them the cause of His 
grief, promising to procure whatever He desired. The Lord replied that He was 
very ill and lacked the strength to move or be quiet. If they really wanted to save 
His life, they must hasten; to the house of two Brahmanas, Jagadish Pandit 
and Hiranya Pandit. Those two had prepared a great variety of offerings for 
Vishnu on that day, which was the ekadasi tithi or the Lord’s Day. If they could 
get from them all those offerings and give them to Him, He would be cured of 
His ailment by feeding on those things. 

The mother was shocked to hear, thinking it was opposed to custom and the 
Scriptures for any one to desire to eat offerings intended for Vishnu and that also 
on the ekadasi day. But the others only burst into merry laughter at these words 
of the Child and assured Him that they would send for the offerings immediately, 
so He need have no anxiety on that account any more. 

Jagannath Misra himself went down to the house of those two Brahmanas who 
happened to be his most intimate friends. He told them what the Boy 
so imperatively wanted. Those two Brahmanas were struck with a sudden 



wonder on hearing the strange proposal. They thought within themselves, This 
is most wonderful for a little Boy. How could He know at all that this is the Day 
of Sree Hari? How could He know that we have prepared to-day a great variety 
of offerings? This makes it perfectly clear to us that Gopala (Cow-boy 
Krishna) Himself dwells in the Figure of this beautiful Boy. Narayana Himself 
sports in the Frame of this Child. May be it is He Who makes Him say these 
words from His seat in the heart of the Child. Thinking in this way those two 
Brahmanas were filled with supreme joy, and at once with the greatest pleasure 
they-brought out all their offerings intended for Vishnu and themselves 
conveyed them to the Home of Jagannath Misra. They offered them with the 
greatest delight to Nimai and pressed Him to eat everything, giving out that all 
their preparations were at last really offered to Krishna Himself. The Lord was 
very much pleased on receiving the offerings and tasted a little of everything. 

His distemper was completely healed. He became as naughty and restless as 
ever, scattering the eatables in all directions and throwing bits of them at those 
who stood in a circle round Him and chanted the Name of Hari as He danced in 
the midst of the samkirtan of Himself 

It is the custom of the Vaishnavas not to eat anything on the day of ekadasi.. This 
does not apply to the Lord Himself to Whom accordingly the usual offerings of 
food are made on the ekadasi day also. Those Brahmanas must have offered the 
food to Nimai in the firm belief that the Boy was no other than Krishna for 
Whom the offerings had been prepared. Such instinctive good sense, observes 
Thakur Brindabandas in this connection, is only possible to one who obtains the 
special mercy of Krishna. Devotion to the Lord does not make her appearance in 
the heart as long as the worldly egotistic attitude persists. One, who gives up all 
reliance upon his own powers and humbly seeks enlightenment from Krishna 
Himself, or, in other words, becomes His willing servant, obtains the mercy of 
Krishna in the shape of devotion to the Feet of the Lord. To the worldly egotist 
all this is utterly incomprehensible. The sudden resolve of the Brahmanas to 
offer the eatables to Nimai, instinctively believing Him to be Vishnu Himself for 
Whom they had been prepared, is a circumstance which cannot be properly 
grasped by any one except the servants of Krishna. The reader may be reminded 
of the fact already noted that when the Lord appears in this world, He comes 
down with His eternal Associates, Servitors and Paraphernalia. This Descent of 
the Lord serves His merciful purpose of bringing the Divine realm within the 
vision of fallen souls thereby affording them the opportunity of serving Himself. 
The narrative of such Activities preserved in the language of this world 
continues to provide the same opportunity for all succeeding generations. But the 



Abode, Associates, Servitors, Paraphernalia, Narratives, although They appear to 
us like the things of this earth, are really spiritual entities, being of the Divine 
Essence. The Lord ever sports with His Own. He is ever manifest in the pure 
spiritual essence and all His Activities take place on the plane of the pure soul. 
His Activities manifesting Themselves in this world also possess the same 
spiritual nature. 

The Lord in His Real, positive or Spiritual Nature is knowable and servable 
by pure souls alone. 

This material world is the shadow of the spiritual world. If the soul seeks the 
Lord in this world, he is perpetually deluded and is forced to arrive at 
the conclusion sooner or later, if he is really sincere in his quest of the Truth, 
that He is not to be found in this world. Less sincere people think that they can 
find Him in this world. But when the Lord actually appears in this world, 
these insincere people either ignore Him, thinking that He is an ordinary mortal, 
or, even if they are told of His Divinity, miss the real view of Him believing Him 
to be Godhead in the guise of mortal and subject to the imperfections of the 
flesh, as by such process of ‘incarnation’ alone He is wrongly imagined to be 
able to make Himself visible to the fettered souls. 

The first is the frankly sceptical attitude that ignores altogether all possibility of 
spiritual existence. The second is no less fatal. It supposes that Godhead may 
be subject to the bondage of Maya, that Godhead may appear in this world as 
an actually sinful person and may engage in all worldly activities in the same 
way as we do. That such sinful activities of Godhead are not sinful, that it is the 
duty of fallen souls to submit to these sinful pastimes of the Lord in his human 
form; and that by such submission alone they can attain to the highest object of 
life. This is philanthropism, or the doctrine of prakrita sahajia sects, which 
is responsible, in some form or other, for all the corruptions of all 
current spurious creeds that profess to be theistic. 

The true view is that the Lord, even when He chooses to be visible to the mortal 
eye, is nothing less than the Lord in His Lullness, because He is always 
Allpowerful, always All-pure, always All-knowledge. Those alone can join in 
His Activities who share His Nature Who is Spiritual and incapable-of 
corruption. That is to say, no sinful person can really see, understand or 
participate in His Activities. The soul that is averse to Godhead, if by dint of the 
awakened sincerity of his nature he is convinced that no connection with the 



Lord can be established so long as the sinful condition itself persists, is enabled 
to obtain deliverance from the bondage of this world by witnessing with faith, 
by studying with faith and by listening with faith to the Narratives of 
these Activities from the lips of the servants of the Lord, by serving with faith 
those from whom he receives the tidings, the Lord,. His Associates and servitors, 
His Abode, the Narrative of His Activities, although they choose to be visible in 
this world from time to time, have nothing in common with anything of this 
world and are incapable of receiving the least stain of worldliness by their 
descent into this world. 

Those who think otherwise are utterly misguided and are profane atheists, as 
they imagine that the Lord is only a created being like their false selves 
and possessing a similar liability to mundane defects and merits. But the 
Scriptures say that there is no greater slander of the All-pervasive (Vishnu) than 
to affect to believe that the Body of Vishnu is material. If this point is properly 
understood, there would be no chance of impostors, full of ah the worst vices of 
humanity, setting up as ‘Incarnations’ ( ?) of Godhead and by their sinful 
activities and spurious performances bringing about the terrible ruin of 
themselves and their unfortunate Victims. 

Lord Vishwambhar continued to be exceedingly restless and wayward. He 
became the leader of ah the turbulent Brahmana boys of the neighbourhood. 

He and His company were constantly after some mischief or other and engaged 
in a campaign of regular raids on different places. No one could check 
His turbulence. He would cut jokes at other children, whenever He chanced 
to meet them. They would also retort, till the affair developed into a regular 
fray. The boys of the Lord’s party were always victorious in these quarrels by 
reason of the superior strength of the Lord, and their opponents found 
themselves compelled to retire discomfited. At this period Sree Gaursundar had 
the most charming Appearance. He was always gray with dust and His Body 
was beautifully adorned with points of writing ink. 

After study was over at midday, Sree Gaursundar, in the company of all the 
children, went daily for His bath in the Ganges. As soon as He got into the water, 
He engaged in merry sports in the water with the children who splashed water at 
one another. Nabadwip was a most opulent city, and the number of bathers at 
each bathing-place baffled ah calculation. They included very staid persons, 
respectable and grave fathers of families, and revered sannyasins, as well as a 
very large number of urchins. The Lord, sporting in the company of the children, 



soon attracted the attention of everybody by the extraordinary Beauty of His 
Person and by His turbulence. As the Lord played with the children, the shower 
of water from His Feet drenched all bathers. He paid no attention to the 
expostulations of the aggrieved parties and moved about so quickly from place 
to place that no one could catch hold of Him. In this manner the Lord made 
everybody bathe over and over again. He would touch some of the bathers and 
even spouted the water by His Mouth at them! 

The Brahmanas, who were also treated in this unorthodox fashion, unable to 
catch hold of the turbulent Boy, at last went to Jagannath Misra and laid 
before him their grievances. Tt was impossible for any one to bathe in the 
proper manner in the Ganges. Sree Gaursundar disturbed one’s meditations by 
the summary method of deliberately dashing the water at him or by spouting 
water at a person in the act of meditation for the avowed reason that it was 
unnecessary to meditate any more, as one could actually see Him on Whom he 
meditated, by simply opening his eyes, standing before Him; He Himself 
being Narayana manifest in the Kali Age.’ 

The Boy, it was alleged, stole one’s phallic symbol of Siva and decamped with 
the upper cloth of another. He occupied the seat prepared for Vishnu, ate all the 
offerings and put on His own person the flowers, etc., while the owner of them 
was engaged in his bath preparatory to worship, and ran away before He could 
be prevented, and would retort, into the bargain, That one need not feel sorry at 
all as He Himself, for Whom the offering is meant, has eaten the 
same.’ Thereafter, coming forward unobserved by diving under the water, He 
would drag away a bather by the legs, as he was engaged in performing his 
sandhya standing up in the water. The flower-basket and loin-cloth of another 
were always missing. The Geeta of one bather was stolen. He had made the 
baby-boy of another cry by putting water into the ears of the child. He had 
climbed one’s back to his shoulder and from there jumped back into the water, 
crying T am Mahesha’. He Himself worshipped Vishnu by occupying the seat 
arranged for worship by another; after having first eaten the intended offering. 

He threw sand at one’s body, after one had finished his bath, and had for the 
purpose all the naughty boys at His heels. He put the cloths of all male persons 
in the place of those of females and vice versa, to the utter shame of all who put 
on the wrong cloths. This was done every day. He did not get out of the water for 
half the day. Was it not likely that He might fall ill? 


These Brahmanas were not the only complainants. The girls had serious 



grievances which they duly laid before Sachi Devi. He stole their cloths, 
abused them and got up a quarrel if they protested. He forcibly took away all 
the flowers and fruits brought by them for performing their vowed worships 
(brata) and scattered them in all directions. 

As, after bathing in the Ganges, the girls began to worship the gods, Nimai 
would appear on the spot with the other children and took His seat in the 
midst of the girls. He asked the maidens to worship Him and told them that He 
would give them the boon they desired, that Ganga and Durga are His maid¬ 
servants and Mahesha is also only His servant. With His own hands He put the 
sandal-paste on His Own Person, wore the garlands of flowers, snatched the 
intended offerings from the girls and ate them. The girls were very indignant and 
said that ‘He was their brother by the relationship of the village. It was not 
proper for them to say all this against Him. But He should also not take away 
their articles for the worship of the gods and should not be boisterous in 
His behaviour.’ To this He would only say, ‘I give the boon to all of you. 

The husbands of you all will be most beautiful, learned, adept, youthful 
and possessing an abundance of grain and other riches. Every one of you will 
have seven sons a-piece, all of whom will live for ever and be of an 
excellent understanding.’ The girls were much pleased at heart on hearing about 
the boon, although externally they took up the scolding attitude by the display 
of false anger. Some of the girls ran away with their offerings. Nimai, 
however, called out to them and angrily told them that if they proved miserly, 
and did not give Him their offerings, they would have old husbands with four co¬ 
wives. They were extremely frightened on hearing this, lest He might possess 
some supernatural art or be possessed by any deity. They accordingly brought 
their offerings back to Him. The Lord ate those offerings and then gave them 
the boon which they desired. He threw sand at their bodies, after they had 
finished their bath, and this was done by Him at the head of all the naughty 
children. Coming up unobserved He shouted into one’s ear with a loud voice. He 
spouted water With His Mouth at one’s face. He stuck the prickly seeds of okhra 
into the hair of a third. He wanted to marry some. He did this every day, as if He 
was the Son of the King. Nimai, they alleged, acted exactly as the Son of Nanda 
in old times. If he was not checked, they would be compelled some day to 
tell their parents, and then there would be serious trouble. 

On hearing all this the mother of the Lord smiled and, taking all of them on her 
lap, spoke kindly to them: ‘Let Nimai come Home to-day. I will tie up His Hands 
and Leet and punish Him, so that He may not again cause any trouble to you.’ 



Then the girls, after taking the dust of Sachi’s feet on their heads, made their 
way once more to the Ganges for their bath. 

But, as a matter of fact, all concerned were exceedingly pleased in their minds, 
however wayward might be the conduct of the Lord towards them, by the 
force of the actual benefit dispensed. They came to Misra to acquaint him with 
those occurrences, only for the fun of it. Misra, however, took their 
complaints seriously and spoke threateningly and with anger: ‘He constantly 
behaves in this way to all persons and has made it impossible for any one to 
bathe in the Ganges in a satisfactory manner. I must immediately go there myself 
and give Him a good thrashing that He may never do this again. If all of you try, 
you will not prevent me from punishing Him. 

Gauranga, the Lord of all beings, was aware of all this. He knew it all, as soon as 
Misra was on his way to the Ganges with an angry mind. He was then playing 
with other children, easily recognizable among them all by His extraordinary, 
Beauty. The girls were the first to inform Him. The said, ‘Be careful, 
Vishwambhar, Misra will be coming just now, fly at once.’ As the Lord, taking 
all the children with Him, ran to catch hold of them, those Brahmana maidens 
scattered in a fright. 

The Lord now instructed all His companions to tell Misra that his Son had not 
come to bathe at all. He had gone home from school by the other road. 

They were waiting for His coming for His bath. After coaching the boys in 
this manner, the Lord returned home by another path. The good Misra 
now appeared at the bathing-place of the Ganges. On reaching the spot Misra 
eagerly looked about in all directions but could not find his Son in the mist of 
the children, Misra asked them about the whereabouts of Vishwambhar. 

The children readily replied, ‘He has not come to bathe to-day. He went home 
by the other road after school. We are all waiting here for Him.’ Misra, with 
stick in hand, peered in all directions and stormed and threatened, being unable 
to find his Boy. Those Brahmanas, who had complained to him for fun, now 
came forward and informed him that Vishwambhar had fled home for fear; and 
they entreated Misra to return home but not say any unkind words to the 
Boy, telling him that they themselves would catch and take the Boy to him, if 
He again did any mischief. ‘What we had told you, was said in fun. There is no 
one in the three worlds who is more fortunate than yourself. What can 
hunger, thirst or sorrow do to him in whose home there happens to be such a 
Child? 



You alone have truly served the Feet of the Lord. Most fortunate, indeed, is he 
who has such a Son. If Vishwambhar commits crores of mischief, hold Him 
fast to your bosom/ Misra said, That Child is the Son of you all. Swear by me 
that you will never be offended with Him.’ And then Misra embraced them all 
and came back home. 

Lord Vishwambhar had gone home by another path, with the beautiful books in 
His Hands, looking like a second Moon. Points of writing-ink adorned all 
parts of His Body, as if the champaka flower was besieged on all sides by the 
black bees. The Lord began to call loudly on His mother asking for oil to rub 
His Body for going to the Ganges for His bath. The voice of her Son gladdened 
the heart of Sachi. She could not discover any sign of bath on His Person. She 
gave Him oil and began to muse. T do not understand what those girls and 
the Brahmanas said just now. His Body is still spotted with the marks of ink and 
He has the same books and the same cloth!’ Presently, Misra also returned 
home. Vishwambhar ran into the arms of Misra as soon as He caught sight of 
him. By that embrace Misra lost all faculty of his external activity, having been 
filled with happiness at the very sight of his Boy. Misra also noticed that His 
Son’s whole body was full of dust and was astonished on finding no sign of 
bath. Misra said, ‘Viswambhar, is this Your good sense? Why don’t You allow 
the people to bathe? Why do You steal the offerings for the worship of Vishnu? 
Are You not afraid even of Vishnu?, The Lord said, ‘I have not gone for my bath 
today. My companions have gone there before Me. They misbehave to all 
the people. People blame Me even when I am not really there. If they thus 
slander Me when I am absent, I say truly that I will really treat them ill.’ With 
these words the Lord ran away laughing to the side of the Ganges to bathe 
and rejoined those children. As soon as they saw Vishwambhar in their midst, 
all the children embraced Him and burst into uproarious laughter on hearing 
of His ruse. They all praised His cleverness and congratulated Him on His 
narrow escape and resumed their pastimes in the water. 

Here at home Sachi and Jagannath cogitated over the affair. ‘What all those 
people said cannot be false. Why then was there no sign of bath on His 
Person? The same dusty Body, the same Dress, Books, Cloth and Hair !’ ‘Is it 
possible 

Vishwambhar is no mortal? Has Krishna Himself been born as our Son by His 
own Power, or some transcendental person?’ While they were thinking in 
this manner, the Crest-jewel of all the twice-born made His Appearance. 



Their deliberations were ended by joy at the sight of their Son. Both were filled 
with instinctive gladness and all suspicions, were laid at rest, Half the day, while 
the Lord was away for His study, seemed to those two as a couple of Ages. In 
this manner played the Lord of Vaikuntha and by His Own Contrivance not a 
single person was able to recognize Him. 

Those, who put up with the almost intolerable turbulences of this strikingly 
beautiful Urchin, certainly possessed a more than ordinary share of patience and 
of the truly aesthetic and tender sentiment. A naughty boy is most liked, if his 
naughtiness is purely juvenile and the outcome of an abundance of the 
pure childish energy. It is in this sense that the extraordinary events of the- 
Childhood of Sree Gaursundar have been affected to be regarded by His 
empiric admirers. 

But the point of view of the associates and narrators of the Transcendental Deeds 
of the Lord is altogether different and it is their point of view which will give us 
the attitude of those who were taught the true relation between the religion and 
His own illustrative Conduct by Sree Chaitanya Himself; and they had also the 
opportunity of realizing the Absolute Truth of those statements by their actual 
experience. The sum and substance of their attitude is that these pranks of the 
Childhood of Sree Gaursundar, Who was by far the most turbulent of all the 
naughty children who then abounded at Nabadwip, were not only tolerated but 
they made all those, who were the victims of His turbulence, have an 
extraordinary affection for the Child Whom a few fortunate persons also 
regarded as Transcendental. It is on this historical fact that a momentous 
generalization in regard to these Activities has been made to rest, viz., that when 
Godhead Himself appears in this world, He comes here with His Divine 
Associates and Abode and These alone are the directly incorporated helpers of 
His Leela in this world. 

All those persons, who had anything to do with the Activities of Sree 
Gaursundar, are the, eternal associates and servants of the Lord who came 
into this world for the purpose of participating in His Activities. But they 
themselves did not know this fully, as such knowledge would take away the 
possibility of those Activities. So their knowledge was to that extent modified by 
the Spiritual Power of Godhead. This apparent obscuration of knowledge, that is 
thus found in His devotees serves to augment the joy of His Pastimes and is 
totally different from the effect of the operation of the Deluding Power that shuts 
out the view of the Divinity from fallen souls of this world by the screen of the 



material world. 


The philanthropists do not understand this vital difference between the 
apparently similar functions of the two distinct powers and confound 
the spiritual with the worldly. The result of such ignorance is also most 
deplorable. A large number of rascals have in all Ages set up as ‘Incarnations’ 
(the term is theirs) of the Divinity and have imitated the activities, the real 
Avatars narrated in the Scriptures. The unbelievable boldness and shamelessness 
of these ‘Incarnations' have captured the credulity of even sensuously disposed 
cultured people who have fallen easy victims to their own immoral designs. 
These events in their turn have re-acted on the beliefs of the more moral sections 
and have unfortunately enough served to shake their belief in spiritual claims of 
any kind. 

This is the psychology of the sceptics and impersonalists whose condition is not 
otherwise different from their deluded immoral brethren who are actually misled 
to accept the worst forms of vice as the means of attaining the promised spiritual 
condition. Both these deluded groups remain necessarily confined to worldly 
activities which are, by their very nature, offensive to Godhead, the one through 
undue credulity and the other through undue incredulity, regarding one’s 
imperative spiritual duty. 

True belief in Godhead is spontaneous and, in its natural form, is very rare in this 
world. Those who really believe in God are thereby freed from all worldliness. 
The conduct of perfectly pure souls cannot be understood, so long as we remain 
in the condition that is dominated by the sensuous outlook. The only way of 
getting out of the sad plight is to gradually acquire faith in spiritual existence by 
listening to the accounts of the Transcendental Activities of the Lord in His 
different Avataras from the lips of true sadhus who alone can prevent us from 
falling into the errors of the misguided philanthropists (prakrita sahajiyas) on 
the one hand and sceptics and atheists on the other, the plight that would befall 
us if we try to understand those accounts in the light (which is really obscuring) 
of our sensuous understanding. 

The Boy continued to be a source of trouble to all the neighbours. They 
complained to Sachi that the Boy stole their things and beat their little 
children. On hearing this Sachi scolded Nimai and ordered Him to remain 
always at home and never to go to anyone’s house. This so much angered the 
Lord that He forthwith ran into the house and smashed all the earthen pots that 



He found there. Then Sachi took Him into her arms and He was pleased and felt 
ashamed for His naughtiness. One day He struck Sachi gently with His Hands 
and wept when she fainted away being so struck. The women who nursed Sachi 
said that if He could get green coconuts, His mother would recover. The 
Lord immediately went out of the house and returned with two green coconuts. 
This feat astonished everybody, as the green coconut was a rare fruit at 
Sree Mayapur and almost impossible to procure at that time of the year. 

One day as Sachi lay in her couch with her Son, she beheld that the house was 
filled with celestial beings. Sachi asked Nimai to call His father. As He 
was leaving the room to fetch His father, the tinkling sound of anklet 
(nupura) distinctly proceeded from His Feet. Misra told Sachi that he actually 
heard the sound of nupura coming from the bare Feet of the Child. Sachi said 
that she had a most strange experience. She had beheld that the courtyard of the 
house was thronged by a great crowd of celestial beings. She did not understand 
the noise that they made, but could infer that they must have been chanting 
hymns of praise to some One. Misra said that there was no cause for anxiety, 
whatever happened. He only desired the welfare of Vishwambhar. 

Another day, on noticing the wayward nature of the Boy, Misra scolded Him 
very severely and tried to instill in Him the principles of orderliness enjoined by 
Religion, that night Misra had a dream in which he beheld that a Brahmana came 
to him and told him with an angry voice that he did not know at all the real truth 
regarding his Son, and it was owing to his ignorance that he scolded and 
punished Him under the impression that He was, indeed, his son and protigi. 
Whereupon Misra said that whatever the Child might be in Himself, even if he 
were a god, a self realized soul (siddha), a contemplative sage (muni), or 
howsoever great a personage, He was still only his own Boy to him. It was the 
specific duty of a father to teach and maintain his son. If he did not tell 
Him about it, how would the Boy know the meaning of Religion? The Brahmana 
said that if the Child was perfect in all knowledge by the grace of Godhead 
Himself and possessed spontaneous Omniscience, then his teaching must be 
perfectly useless. Whereupon Misra said that it was still the duty of the father to 
teach his Son, even if He happened to be Narayana Himself. They discoursed in 
this way, Misra ignoring all other considerations in trying to uphold the point 
of view of the parent. That Brahmana was at last satisfied and took his leave 
of Misra with great pleasure. Misra told all his friends about his dream and all 
of them were very much surprised to hear of it. 



Chapter 7 Growing Boy (Continued) 


Sree Gaursundar pursued His studies at the Academy of Gangadas Pandit with 
great zeal. He soon acquired a great proficiency in the sutra, panji and tika 
of Vyakarana. One day the Lord, making obeisance to the feet of His 
mother, begged for a boon from her. Having made mother promise to give 
Him whatever boon He desired, the Lord said that she was to promise that 
she would not eat cooked grain (annam) on the Lord’s Day (ekadasi). Sachi 
agreed to follow His advice, and from that day, observed the ekadasi fast. 

In this manner Sree Gaursundar continued to manifest Himself in various ways 
under the guise of childhood pastimes. He was extremely turbulent and 
restless and paid no heed to the expostulations of His mother who tried to teach 
Him to be quiet. The warnings and entreaties of His mother seemed only to 
increase His waywardness. He used to break whatever article of the house He 
could lay His hands on. The parents, for fear of further mischief, gave up all 
attempt to oppose Him, to the great joy of the Child, Who was thereby afforded 
an opportunity of unrestrained play. Nimai soon ceased to be afraid of all 
persons, including His parents. The only person, whom He still feared, was His 
elder brother, Viswarup, Whose very sight made Him exceedingly meek. 

Viswarup had no attachment for the things of this world even from His birth. He 
devoted all His time to discourses about Krishna. He served Krishna with the 
ear, mouth, mind and all senses, and served only Krishna at all time. Viswarup 
was struck by the habits of His younger Brother, which were altogether different 
from those of ordinary children. He realized the conduct of Nimai as identical 
with that of Boy-Krishna. He was aware of the Transcendental Divine Nature of 
the Boy in Whose Form He could detect the Presence of sportive Krishna. 
Viswarup was, however, careful not to divulge His knowledge regarding His 
Brother to any one else. He was in fact always intent on His own devotions, was 
constantly in the company of the Vaishnavas and was wholly occupied with the 
joy of Krishna-talk, Krishna-devotion and Krishna-worship. 

This aloofness of Viswarup from the world increased apace by the re-action of 
His godless surroundings. The people of Nadia of that time, as has already 
been noted, were inordinately and exclusively given to the pursuit of worldly 
objects. This was the condition not merely of the vulgar, illiterate mass, but also 
of the most highly educated people. The acknowledged headquarters of all 



learning of the country of that Age was absolutely devoid of love for God. The 
teachers of the Bhagavatam themselves were no exception to the rule. These also 
neither understood, practiced, nor explained the principles of devotion to 
Godhead and were equally mad after wives, wealth and fame. It was this godless 
atmosphere of the emporium of learning, abounding in luxuries of all kinds, that 
appeared to Viswarup to be so stifling and unbearable that He at last made up 
His mind to leave the place for good, to avoid the sight of such people. 

Meanwhile He scrupulously avoided all association with the ungodly. He used to 
bathe in the Ganges very early in the morning and proceeded immediately to the 
gathering of the Vaishnavas at the house of Advaita. There He explained all the 
Shastras showing how all Scriptures proclaimed the supreme excellence 
of devotion to Krishna. His explanations gave so much pleasure to Advaita that 
he often broke off abruptly in the midst of his worship with thundering shouts 
of joy and would clasp Viswarup to his bosom amid the joyous chants of 
the Name of Hari by all assembled devotees moved to raptures by the 
edifying spectacle. The devotees, assembled at Advaita's house, spent their time 
in the greatest happiness and no one was minded to return to his home or leave 
the company of Viswarup. Neither would Viswarup ever come home from 
His companions. 

After cooking his meal, Sachi Devi would ask Vishwambhar to fetch His brother 
from the gathering at Advaita’s. The Lord appeared before the assembly in the 
midst of Krishna-talk of those devotees. Pleased with their discourse regarding 
Himself, the Lord would bend His auspicious glance on His devotees as He 
asked His brother to come home for His meal. He then took hold of His brother’s 
cloth and led Him away from the place. 

On every such occasion the devotees felt the wonderful attraction of the Child. 
They remained silent, abstaining even from Krishna-talk, all the time the 
Boy was in their midst. They noticed, with rapt attention, every detail of 
the beautiful Limbs of the nude Child and every motion of His Body, and 
drank with the greatest joy His luscious Accents. And, after Vishwambhar had 
left the place, the great Advaita told them one day that he was unable to 
understand Who that Boy really was. Advaita had realized that He was no 
ordinary Child. 


The subject has been treated in a remarkable dialogue between Sree Suka and 
King Parikshit in the Bhagavatam. When this very Gaurchandra, says 



Thakur Brindabandas, was born in the settlement of the cowherds as Sree 
Krishna, all the cowherds loved Him from His birth more tenderly than they 
loved even their own sons. They did not know that Krishna was Godhead 
Himself, yet they naturally loved Him more than their own sons. 

King Parikshit desired Sree Sukadeva to explain how this was possible, as it was 
opposed to all experience of this world. Sree Suka said that there is 
nothing dearer to our souls than the great Soul of all souls. The Son of Sree 
Nanda is the Supreme Soul. Therefore, the milkmaids of Braja had greater love 
for Krishna, as He is the Supreme Soul himself. But this also holds true only in 
the case of the devotees; as otherwise, all the world would have loved Krishna. 
Kamsa and other atheists (asuras) bore malice against Krishna, although Krishna 
is also the Soul of their souls, by the effect of offenses against Him previously 
committed by them. Sugar is naturally sweet. But there are some who find its 
taste bitter by reason of the defect of their own tongues. The fault is of the 
tongue, not of sugar. Therefore, says Thakur Brindabandas, although Lord 
Chaitanya is really All-sweet and was visible to everybody in this very town of 
Nabadwip yet was He unrecognized by any one except the devotees. The Lord 
ever fascinates the minds of His Own devotees in every manner. This mystery is 
incomprehensible to the atheists. 

Viswarup would go home only in name and was never attached to it. While 
visiting home He would spend all His time there inside the chamber of 
worship of Vishnu. This behaviour led His parents to bethink themselves of 
His marriage. Viswarup thereupon carried out His cherished resolve of quitting 
the world. The foremost of the Vaishnavas thus became a sannyasin soon after 
this and left home in quest of the Infinite. As sannyasin Viswarup was known by 
the appellation of Sree Sankararanya. 

These events raise a number of important issues. It is necessary to notice one of 
them at this place. The fascination that the Divinity exercises over the minds 
of His devotees, should not be confounded with the clouding of the faculty 
of judgment produced by an excess of worldly joy or sorrow. The exclusive 
mood of the devotees at the Sight of Sree Gaursundar and the similar moods of 
Suka and Narada are not to be put into the same category with the outwardly 
similar exhibitions of ultra-sentimentalism exhibited by the worldlings. The 
latter is recognized, under the name of moha, by all the Shastras, as one of the 
six evil passions (ripus) being classed with anger, lust, etc., that have to be 
carefully got rid of by all persons who are sincerely desirous of spiritual living. 



The former is the natural impulse of the pure individual soul who always 
experiences this spontaneous attraction for the Absolute. The genuine spiritual 
attraction is not a dry, abstract process; neither does it bear any affinity to the 
sensuous impulse, to which our body and mind are so wrongly subject, that is 
exercised by the prospects of worldly enjoyment. Those who have been enabled 
by their love for the Absolute to overcome the sensuous attraction exercised by 
the material universe, are thereby enabled to experience the far greater attraction 
of the service for Krishna. The great Love of Krishna for His servants cannot 
be consciously realized in the conditioned state. That love for Krishna, which 
is possible of realization in the fettered state in this world, is somewhat 
analogous to the attraction that is experienced by the cows, the cane, the flute, 
etc., for the Lord, in the realm of Braja. 

Sree Sankararanya after acceptance of sannyas journeyed to various parts and 
exhibited the state of realized exclusiveness in the Lord (samadhi) 
at Pandurangpur or Pandharpur (in the Sholapur District of the 
Bombay Presidency). 

Sachi and Jagannath were most profoundly affected by the sannyas of Viswarup. 
Sree Gaursundar exhibited the Leela of fainting away at separation from 
His Brother (devotee). All the people of Nadia, high and low, whoever heard of 
the sannyas of Viswarup, were filled with a great grief. The home of 
Jagannath Misra was turned into the abode of mourning. Jagannath and Sachi 
cried constantly on the name of Viswarup. The friends and relatives of Misra 
tried their best to compose him. Some of their arguments bear to be repeated 
here. 

‘Be quiet, Misra,’ said they, ‘that great Son has earned the deliverance of all His 
kindred. If a single member of a family accept sannyas three crores 
of generations of that family thereby attain to the happy realm of Vaikuntha. 
Your beloved Son has performed a great meritorious deed. All His learning has 
at last been crowned with its supreme success. Rejoice greatly at this. All your 
sorrows will be removed by this other Son of yours. Vishwambhar will be the 
Support of the family. What are crores of sons to him whose Son is He ?’ Misra 
was inconsolable. He did not feel certain that the other Son will also stay in 
the family. He could not forget the many good qualities of Viswarup. By 
slow degrees, however, the worthy Misra picked up patience and regained 
the equilibrium of his faculties. He was helped in this by his enlightened faith 
in Krishna. ‘Krishna gave me the Child and has now taken Him away. The Will 



of Krishna should certainly prevail. The soul of the jiva has no tittle of power of 
his own. I, therefore, surrender myself, my body and senses, to Thee, 

O Krishna.’ 

The devotees experienced a clinging sorrow in the midst of their joy, when they 
learnt of the sannyas of Viswarup. 'Krishna , 5 thought they, 'has robbed us of 
the only place where we might hear the talk about Him. We also will no longer 
stay among these people but will go into the forest where we shall not have to 
see the faces of these sinful persons. It is impossible to bear longer the torment 
of the blasphemies of these atheists. All people are constantly pursuing the 
evil course. We cannot convince them of their error. If we tell them of it, they 
only receive the statement with ridicule, saying that we are not happier than they 
in any way by worshipping Krishna. What is the use associating with such 
people ?’ 

The griefs of neither Jagannath Misra nor of those devotees, are of the nature of 
the sorrows that overtake all worldly people at the curtailment of any possibility 
of their selfish enjoyment. Jagannath Misra realized the tme significance of the 
sonnies of Viswarup. His lamentations, properly understood, are really an 
expression of his appreciation of the transcendental nature of the Son who had 
left him for good. This realization accordingly also effected the sannyas of 
Jagannath Misra himself. The language of his friends echoes the attitude of the 
devotees. The devotees, however, fully sympathized with the keen sorrow of 
Viswarup at sight of the utter godlessness of the people, and appreciated the 
quality of Viswarup’s exclusive devotion to Krishna. 

The tears of the devotees are always different from those shed by worldly 
people. The weeping of the devotees is the expression of their 
absorbing devotion to Krishna. The tears of worldly people are caused by their 
aversion to Krishna. Worldly people always think of their own personal joys and 
sorrows. Outwardly the exhibitions of both seem to be identical to those who are 
not conscious of their categorical difference; and self-deception in this form 
is unfortunately by no means rare as is proven by the sickening, 
neurotic performances of hypocritical philanthropists. 

Sree Advaita Acharya consoled the assembled devotees. He declared that ‘they 
would assuredly obtain the highest bliss,—he, indeed, on his part felt 
perfectly sure about it. He experienced a great joy in his mind. It seemed to him 
that Krishna-Chandra Himself had appeared in the world.’ He asked them all to 



sing Krishna with the utmost delight. He assured them that they would see 
Krishna at that very place within a short time. ‘Krishna will display His joyous 
Activities in the company of yourselves. Advaita (referring to himself) is a pure 
servant of Krishna, only if this prove true. This servant of you all will gain such 
Divine favour that seldom falls to the lot of even Suka or Prahlada.’ These 
nectarine words of Advaita filled the devotees with great joy and restored 
cheerfulness to all the faculties of their minds. In their joy they shouted the 
Name of Hari with a thundering voice. This reached the ears of Sree Gaursundar 
Who was then playing with the children. He entered Advaita’s Academy on 
hearing the sound of Hari. ‘What brings Thee here, Darling?’ asked the devotees. 
The Lord said, ‘Why did you ask Me to come?’ With these words the Lord sped 
into the midst of the children. No one could understand those, by the contrivance 
of His Divine Power. 

It is the privilege of the pure devotee to have the Sight of Krishna being served 
by His devotees. Sree Advaita was right in maintaining this view. 

The empiricists blunder hopelessly, when they arrive at the conclusion, by 
the process of induction from their sensuous experience, that Godhead is devoid 
of Distinct Personality and Activities. By trying to know Godhead by the 
limited faculties of the human mind, the speculative philosophers, when they 
care at all to take up the positive attitude, arrive at an abstract conception of 
Godhead (Brahman) as the antithesis of this limited and imperfect phenomenal 
world. This is the utmost limit—the ultima Thule — of the ascending ( ?) effort 
of the human mind from the data of sense-experience. This consummation is 
perfectly logical. The human mind can conceive of nothing that is not limited. 

It, therefore, tries to arrive at the Absolute, simply by destroying the 
positive content of empiric thought. But this is neither here nor there. The 
revelationists realize the Absolute, not in this abstract form of the mundane, but 
as He really is. They find Him as the Living Reality and not an abstraction of the 
erring mind. They are enabled to receive the knowledge of the Absolute by 
the resuscitation of the dormant serving faculty of the soul by the Grace of 
the Absolute Himself. The Absolute descends into this limited world in order 
to reveal Himself to the redeemed soul of man. When He does so, He is 
recognized as the Absolute by His pure devotees who are eternally and 
divinely enlightened. Advaita, the purest of devotees, was the first among the 
assembled Vaishnavas to realize the Descent of Krishna into the world, he 
also simultaneously realized that those assembled Vaishnavas were the servants 
of Krishna, who had appeared in the mundane world preparatory to the Advent 
of the Lord Himself. Thus the Whole Truth flashed on the spiritual 



consciousness of Advaita and he realized in it the special mercy of Godhead 
towards Himself in response to his single-hearted devotion. 

The Lord became a little quieter from the time when Viswarup renounced the 
family. He was now found constantly at the side of His parents evidently for 
the reason that they might thereby forget their sorrow. He was also less devoted 
to play than before and gave more attention to His study. He did not leave 
His books even for a moment. His cleverness was wonderful. He puzzled all 
persons over every sutra by reading it only once. This became quickly known to 
all the people who were lavish in their praise of the excellent judgment of the 
Child and carried the glad tidings to Jagannath Misra. ‘You are, indeed, 
most fortunate in having such a Son. There is not another child in all the 
three worlds who is possessed of His good sense. He will surpass Brhaspati 
himself in learning. He can explain whatever He hears. But no one can explain 
His puzzles.’ 

Sachi was very much delighted on hearing these praises of the good qualities of 
her Son. But Misra was greatly dejected. He now opened his mind to Sachi. 

‘The Boy would not remain in the family. The same thing would happen in His 
case as in that of Viswarup. It was by studying the Shastras in this manner 
that Viswarup became aware that the world was not true at all, and it was not 
worth one’s while to live in it for a single moment. It was the knowledge of 
the transitory nature of the world that made Viswarup quit it. If this Boy came 
to learn the real meaning of the Shastras, He also would give up all 
worldly pleasures. But this Son of ours is the Life of us both. If we do not see 
Him, Both of us will surely die. Therefore, He must have nothing to do with 
study. Let our Nimai only stay in the family. We do not mind if He is illiterate.’ 

Sachi at first demurred to the proposal. ‘If He does not read anything, how will 
He earn His living? Will also any one give Him his daughter in 
marriage?’ Jagannath Misra told Sachi that she ought to know better, as she was 
the daughter of a Brahmana. ‘Krishna is the only Slayer, Master and Protector 
of everybody. The Lord of the world is the sole Maintainer of the world. Who 
had told her that it was learning that maintained anybody. One will surely have 
the girl whom Krishna assigns to him, whether he be a scholar or a fool. 

Family, learning, etc., are only apparent helps. It is Krishna Who maintains 
everyone. Krishna is the strength of all. He himself has all along been starving, 
although he is a good scholar; while the door-steps of the most illiterate persons 
are thronged with hosts of begging savants. A life that is free from want, and 



death with ease, can never be the lot of a person who does not worship the Feet 
of Govinda. These blessings are obtained by worshipping Krishna, and not 
by learning. There can be no end of one’s sorrows save by the mercy of 
Krishna. The possession of learning, high lineage and great riches does not make 
any difference. Krishna sometimes afflicts, with some virulent disease, a 
person whose house is full of all enjoyable things and makes it impossible for 
him to enjoy any of those things. Such a person is even more miserable than one 
who has not the wherewithal to procure those luxuries. Know this as certain 
that nothing of this world is of any avail. What is commanded by Krishna, 
alone comes to pass. Therefore, you need have no anxiety for your Child. I 
say Krishna will maintain the Boy. I will not allow any sorrow to touch Him, 
as long as there is life left in my body. Krishna is the Protector of all of us. There 
is no anxiety for One Who is the Son of a loyal matron like yourself. I tell you 
He must not read any more. Let my Son only stay with the family and be a 
fool.’ The worthy Misra called his Son and told Him on his oath ‘that He must 
not read from that day. He assured his Son that he would supply all His wants. 
All He had to do from now was to live at home in every comfort.’ Without 
stopping for a reply Misra hastily left the place to attend to other works. 

Nimai was sorry at heart at this abrupt stoppage of the pleasures of study; but, in 
obedience to His father’s command, He at once discontinued His studies. 

His waywardness, however, now increased more and more. It now passed 
all bounds. He did indiscriminate damage to property both in the house 
and elsewhere. He took particular delight in smashing everything that came in 
His way. Some days He stayed away whole nights amusing Himself in all kinds 
of play with the children. 

Two boys hid themselves under a piece of blanket and went about as a bull. In 
this fashion He and a companion broke up during the night the plantain grove of 
a household that He had marked out for the raid in the day-time. The inmates of 
the house lamented their damage under the impression that it was the doing of a 
bull. The Lord with the children bolted, as soon as people of the house were 
astir. He would bind fast the door of a house from the outside, preventing the 
members from attending to calls of nature. As they began to shout in a great 
perplexity, demanding to know who had done the deed, and tried to find out the 
mischief monger, the Lord decamped with His followers. The Lord was 
occupied in this manner night and day in the company of the children. But Misra 
did not utter a single word, despite all this. 



One day while Misra had been called away from the house on some business, the 
Lord, indignant at being kept out of His studies, sat on a pile of refuse earthen 
pots that had been cast away after being used by the family in cooking offerings 
for Vishnu. The soot from the sides of the pots blackened the whole Body of the 
Boy as He sat there laughing. The children of the neighbourhood were not slow 
in conveying the tidings to Sachi Devi. ‘Nimai’ they said, ‘is sitting on the refuse 
cooking-pots.’ The mother was most disagreeably surprised on receiving this 
news, as she hastened to the spot and found the report true. She importuned her 
Son to come down from His unclean seat, telling Him that He ought to have 
known at His age that it was necessary to bathe if one touched a refuse cooking- 
pot. The Lord at first said that He could not be expected to possess the 
knowledge, as He was debarred from all study. All places were the same to Him. 
He possessed no knowledge of good and evil. His knowledge was always one 
and the same. And when the mother repeated her remarks that He could by no 
means be considered clean as He sat in a dirty place, the Lord plainly told the 
truth to His mother. 

‘Mother,’ said He in the manner of a child, ‘you are no better than an infant to 
speak so thoughtlessly. I never stay in any unclean place. The spot where I am, is 
full of all holinesses. All holy tirthas, the Ganges and the rest, abide there. 

My cleanliness or uncleanliness is purely a matter of the deluded 
imagination. Ponder this well. Can there be any sin in the Creator? Even if a 
thing happens to be impure according to the opinion of men or of the Veda, can 
such impurity exist when it is touched by Myself? As to these pots, there has 
been no cause of any uncleanliness in them, as you yourself used them for 
cooking the offering for Vishnu. The vessel used in cooking offerings for Vishnu 
is never made unclean thereby. On the contrary, the touch of pots so used 
sanctifies all places. For all these reasons I am not staying in any bad place. The 
purity of all things is due to My touch.’ 

The Lord laughed in the mood of a child as He spoke these words. No one 
understood their real meaning by the force of the beneficent Power of the 
Lord. These words of the Child only amused and made them laugh. Thereupon 
Sachi asked Him to come down to bathe. But the Boy refused to descend from 
His seat, although Sachi urged Him to make haste lest father might come to 
know. 


‘I will never come down,’ said the Lord, ‘if you do not allow Me to read. 



The people, who had collected to the spot, now took the side of the Lord. They 
found fault with the mother for having stopped the studies of the Child. 

‘All people are most careful to make their children learn to read and write. It is 
a rare good fortune when a child himself wants to read. There could be no 
greater enemy than a person who had advised her to stop the studies of the Boy 
in order to keep Him at home and make a dunce of Him. The Child was not at 
all to blame in this matter.’ They also implored Nimai to come down, telling 
Him to go on doing all sorts of mischiefs if He was not allowed to read from 
that very day. 

The Boy, however, still lingered where He was and went on laughing from His 
seat on the top of the pile of the refuse cooking pots. Those who saw it 
were fascinated, and the joy of those persons of good deeds knew no bounds. 
Till at last the mother herself went up to the Child and fetched Him with her 
own hands. The Lord now came away, laughing all the time, like a blue 
opal shooting its sparkling light in all directions. Thus did the Lord speak out 
the truth in the mood of Dattatreya; but no one understood it by the 
interposition of the Power of Vishnu. 

Virtuous Sachi, now helping her Son to descend from the pile, made Him bathe 
in order to be cleansed. Misra then made his appearance. Sachi told 
Misra everything. ‘The Child is grieved at heart by not being allowed to read.’ 
All present pressed Misra to lift the ban. ‘He is wise and liberal and should be 
better advised. What Krishna-Chandra wills, is sure to come to pass. He 
should, therefore, allow the Boy to read and you need have no anxiety on His 
account. The Boy Himself is very willing to read. So Misra should forthwith 
invest the Child with the sacrificial thread on an auspicious day and in a fitting 
manner.’ Misra agreed to their proposal. 

The acts of the Child were super-human and astonished everybody. But no one 
understood their real significance. Occasionally some, who happened to 
be exceptionally fortunate, told Misra not to regard his Son as mortal child 
and had advised him to cherish the Boy with the greatest care and affection. 
The Lord thus passed the days unrecognized and played in the yard of Sachi 
after the resumption of His studies which He did with the greatest delight 
by command of His father. The diverse restrictions that have been put 
upon worldly activities by the religious codes (smrtis) cannot be understood, if 
they are regarded as intended for the promotion of worldly enjoyment. Those, 
who uphold the rules, as rules, have found it necessary to secure their 



observance by promises of enjoyment and threats of misery. This method has 
been a failure, because it did not take a long time for worldly people to find out 
that those promises and treats were not really to be fulfilled. Neither did they 
attract the really intelligent class of people, as they promised only worldly 
rewards which naturally appeared to such persons to be out of place in religion. 
This is the plight of canon-ridden (smarta) ‘Hinduism’. The rules themselves 
have accordingly lost the effective support of all classes. 

It does not follow, therefore, that the mode of life enjoined by the Shastras is 
defective. That mode, if rightly understood, is necessary to be followed for 
our eternal welfare. The conduct enjoined by the Shastras forms Divinely 
ordained system for all those who desire to qualify for a spiritual life, that is to 
say, are prepared to subordinate their apparent temporary, to the real, permanent 
and eternal interests. Such a desire is possible only in man and constitutes 
the special privilege and glory of human life. 

Material enjoyment does not satisfy man, as it does other animals. The quest of 
the spiritual is the distinctive, imperative necessity of man. He wants to 
know why he is here at all. Those, who think that it is the principal duty of man 
to improve the conditions of his present worldly existence, try to find out the 
best way of promoting the scope and quality of mundane activities. The smartas 
also belong to this class. To this category belong, directly or indirectly, most 
people of this world. There is, however, a class of people who think that it is 
our principal, nay- only, duty to serve the Absolute, irrespective of 
apparent worldly loss and gain which are transitory and unreal. The Shastras 
are accepted for their constant guidance only by this class of people. The 
smartas only pretend to agree with this class regarding their acceptance of the 
shastric method. The smartas, however, really want to serve the false ego, which 
craves for the transitory enjoyment of this world, by the rules of the 
Scriptures followed by, the former who serve the true ego by dint of their 
natural attachment to the Absolute. The method of the, smartas is, therefore, 
rightly condemned by even consistent worldly people, as being both irrational 
and ineffective and, in no less unambiguous language, by those who really want 
to walk in the path of the soul. 

The restrictive rules of the Shastras are intended for curtailing the opportunity 
and scope of worldly enjoyment. This is their negative aspect. But these 
rules really impose obligations of a positive nature. The object of the rules is to 
direct the mind towards Godhead. These rules are not numerous nor 



unintelligible. There are, however, rules of various grades. These Scriptural 
dogmas differ from ordinary rules of worldly conduct by their possession of a 
much more advanced and consistent philosophical nature. In the hands of the 
smartas these rules have suffered mechanical elaboration and stultification for 
being adopted to the worldly purpose. 

Cooking for oneself is discouraged by the Shastras. The act of cooking meal, as 
every other act, must be performed only for Godhead. For those who do not want 
to accept this view, the way is prepared by a number of restrictive observances in 
regard to cooking done for the appeasement of hunger. These restrictive rules are 
necessarily superfluous, or rather fulfilled, if cooking is actually done only for 
Godhead. If we search for the spiritual principle, it is not difficult to understand 
the rules, although it is not possible for a worldly-minded person to follow them 
consistently, unless he is really prepared to subordinate the worldly out-look to 
the spiritual requirement. 

The ideas of purity and impurity, as applied by the mechanical smartas to lifeless 
objects, are ridiculous. It is a product of eclipsed cognitive existence due to 
aversion to Godhead. An object or an act is impure by reference to the attitude 
towards it of the conscious entity who is responsible for its performance. 
According to the Shastras, everything is pure which is used in the service of the 
Absolute by reason of the fully conscious use by the performer of it. An object, 
which according to the eclipsed point of view appears to be objectionable, is 
necessarily rendered wholesome, i.e., is purified by being consciously used in 
the service of Godhead Whereas the cleanest or most wholesome objects from 
the worldly standpoint may become necessarily dirty by their unspiritual use The 
reference to Godhead is the only cause of purity in its rational sense. The 
reference of any object to the false ego is the only cause of its impurity. All the 
Scriptures bear unanimous testimony to the truth of this conclusion. 

The Lord, the Moon of the home of Sachi-Jagannath, thus enjoyed His 
childhood sports, infinitely more diverse than are found in this world, of 
which an infinitesimally small part will be hereafter made known to the world, 
by way of revelation, by the Acharyak These are the words of Sree 
Brindavandas Thakur. The words of the Veda reach only the ears of the most 
fortunate persons. The rest of the world must submit to receive the knowledge 
from those few. These sports of Sree Saursundar were witnessed by all the 
people. 



Yet no one recognized the Lord. They all took Him to be a mere human child. 
Similar is the case as regards the words of the Veda. Most people do not 
really hear them, although they are available for being heard by all. 

While Sree Gaurchandra was occupied with these pastimes of childhood, 
apparently oblivious of everything else, the time for His investiture with 
the sacrificial thread drew nigh. The friends and relatives of the family, duly 
invited by Misra, met together in the house of Jagannath. The different 
functions connected with the ceremony were distributed among them, each 
taking up the part that suited him best. There was great rejoicing. The ladies sang 
of the Excellent Qualities of Krishna amidst frequent exclamations of ‘jai,. 

The dancers kept pace with those who played on the mrdanga, the sanai and 
the banshi. Brahmanas read the Veda and minstrels recited eulogies. Thus 
joy assumed a visible form in the home of Sachi. All auspicious 
planetary conjunctions hastened to serve the occasion. In this manner did 
Sree Gaursundar put on the holy thread of sacrifice. 

As the beautiful thread adorned the Divine Form, it seemed as if Sree Shesha 
himself encompassed the Lord in the guise of the slender line. The 
identical Leela of the Lord, that He performed in His Appearance as Vamana 
(Dwarf ), was thus reenacted. Sree Gaursundar manifested the Leela of Sree 
Vamana to the delight of all beholders. All saw the fiery radiance of the 
Brahmana and no longer thought Him mortal. 

As is the practice on such occasions, the Lord, with the Brahmachari’s staff in 
His hand and the wallet for receiving alms across His shoulders, went on a- 
begging tour to the doors of all His devotees. The ladies of every household put 
as much alms into the wallet of the Lord as their resources enabled them to do, 
with the utmost satisfaction and with a smiling countenance. The consorts of 
Brahma and Rudra and the helpmates of all the contemplative sages (munis), 
assuming the forms of Brahmana matrons, availed themselves of this 
opportunity of beholding the Divine Form of Sree Vamana, and all of them 
laughingly poured their alms into the wallet of the Lord. The Lord enacted this 
Leela of amana for the deliverance of all persons. 

There is a controversy among worldly sections in regard to the question of the 
attitude of Sree Chaitanya towards the caste system. The Lord Himself was 
born in a Brahmana family and went through all the purificatory ceremonies that 
are enjoined by the Shastras for the observance of Brahmanas. Are we to 



suppose from this that the fact is to be interpreted as favouring the retention of 
the present caste-distinctions ? It has also been pointed out by the 
controversialists that as a sannyasin Sree Chaitanya resorted to the houses of 
Brahmanas to beg for His meals. This was apparently the rule, though there were 
also notable exceptions. 

Why did Sree Gaursundar assume the sacrificial thread ? Why was He born in a 
Brahmana family? The answer of course is not very difficult to find. What is 
the harm? The Lord is free to do as He likes. It will be a mistake to suppose that 
He can be subject to any limitation whatever. The contention, that He should 
have proved the futility of castes and ceremonials by, being born outside caste 
and refusing all ceremonial, is itself an attempt, of its kind, to limit the 
unlimited. He was not against caste, nor in favour of it. He was above the caste. 
The hereditary Brahmana caste is, however, very different from the scriptural 
varna of Brahmanas who know the Brahman, i.e., the greatness of Godhead. 

The knowledge of the greatness of Godhead is the necessary pre-requisite 
for attaining to the service of God. Any one who possesses this 
preliminary knowledge is alone a Brahmana by varna. The knowledge of the 
Brahman is not the effect of seminal birth. A person born in a Brahmana family 
is born again, i.e., becomes a dvija, by the ceremony of investiture with the holy 
thread. He ceases to be a seminal-born by his formal accepted submission to 
receive spiritual enlightenment from the spiritual Guide. There are two 
successive enlightening ceremonies. By the first of these ceremonies, which is 
called the upanayana, the seminal-born obtains the right of listening to the 
words of the Veda from the good preceptor; by the subsequent ceremony of 
initiation ( diksha ), he obtains the positive knowledge of the transcendental. 

These are the two successive stages thorough which every disloyal soul has to 
pass, on the way to the spiritual service of Godhead. These processes 
have nothing to do with the hereditary caste or lifeless ceremonial that is sought 
to be monopolized by any hereditary caste. 

But Sree Gaursundar does not merely uphold the non-seminal scriptural 
Brahmana ideal and practice in going through the upanayana ceremony. He 
was re-enacting the Activities of Vamana, that possess a very much 
higher significance. Vamana begs for alms from His devotees. Godhead is the 
Absolute Proprietor of everything. What alms can He beg and what alms can 
also a soul offer to Him? This is the real point at issue in the Vamana Avatara. 
Sree Vamana begged from King Bali (Sacrifice) for that measure of space which 



is covered by His Three Strides. He encompassed the gross world with one 
Stride and the subtle material world by the second Stride. The surrender 
of everything, physical and mental is not enough to satisfy the Lord Who 
also begs for the surrender of the soul of the jiva who is located in the third 
region, viz., Vaikuntha which transcends both e gross and the subtle material 
worlds. 

This Leela of the Divine Dwarf was re-enacted by Sree Gaursundar for the 
deliverance of all souls. In other words, the individual soul can be 
delivered from ignorance regarding himself only by the constant practice of this 
supreme sacrifice. Godhead chose to be born in a Brahmana family in the Kali 
Age, not to prove that the seminal Brahmana caste is superior to the other 
seminal castes; neither for the purpose of establishing the superior excellence of 
seminal birth in a Brahmana family. Sree Krishna had already been born in the 
family of a cowherd. 

By the express testimony of the Shastras, the pseudo-Brahmanas of this Kali 
Age are the worst of all classes of the people. Sree Gaursundar appeared in 
a Brahmana family, in fulfillment of the words of the Scriptures, for showing 
His mercy to the degraded Brahmanas. As Sanyasin Sree Chaitanya was a 
strict observer of the Shastric rules that impose various restrictions on a 
person belonging to that order, in order to set an example to the degenerate 
sannyasins of the Kali Age. Such conduct does not mean that a sannyasin is, 
spiritually speaking, superior to a householder, but that both should really follow 
the Word of God, if they want at all to serve Him which alone matters. It would 
be a blunder to suppose that there could be any excellence in any institution if 
it ceases to serve God, or that any institution which serves the Lord can 
be inferior to any other, or that any mundane class difference can apply to 
the servants of the Lord. Those, who are unduly attached to the vanities of 
seminal birth or the externals of ceremonials and institutions, are ever 
condemned to the delusion that their ungodly worldly preferences are endorsed 
by God Himself. It is not possible to be completely free from the influence of 
such worldly predilections except by the Causeless Grace of Sree 
Gaursundar Manifested in His Activities. 

The Shastras fix the eighth year from birth as the proper age for investiture with 
the sacrificial thread. Such investiture admits one to the right of studying 
the Word of God under the spiritual preceptor. The Lord was now eligible to 
study under the spiritual preceptor in the company of other students. He threw 



out a hint that He would like to study under the great Grammarian Gangadas 
Pandit. 

Sree Jagannath Misra accordingly took his Boy to the Chatuspathi (Academy) of 
Sree Gangadas Pandit who received him with the greatest respect. 

Misra communicated to him his intention of placing in his hands the education 
of his Boy. Gangadas most gladly accepted his new Pupil. 

Gangadas always treated Nimai with special consideration. The extraordinary 
Capacity of the Child soon manifested itself. Nimai fully understood 
whatever His teacher explained only once. He practiced to refute all the 
explanations of His teacher in order to re-establish them more firmly. The 
number of students, who attended Gangadas Pandit’s classes, was very large. But 
there was no one who had the ability to find fault with the explanations of 
Nimai. On the contrary Nimai gave constant trouble to all His fellow-students by 
His puzzling questions. He did not spare even the senior students such as Sree 
Murari Gupta, Sree Kamalakanta, Krishnananda and their associates. They, 
however, took this favourably, as they regarded the Child with special affection. 
Gangadas Pandit was most highly gratified on noticing the wonderful 
intelligence of his new Pupil and accorded Him the honour of the highest 
position among all his students. 

The Lord went with the boys to bathe in the Ganges at noon after study. To these 
bathing-places of the Ganges all the students of Nabadwip flocked for their daily 
bath at midday. The number of students who studied at Nabadwip baffled all 
calculation. Every single professor taught thousands of students. The pupils of 
the different teachers quarreled incessantly among themselves. The Lord was on 
the threshold of budding youth—a period that is naturally full of strange 
excitement. He disputed freely with all the students. These quarrels of the 
students possessed certain invariably common features. The ordinary forms of 
attack were these: ‘Your teacher has no brains’; and ‘Look here; he is the 
only real teacher whose pupil am I’. In this manner, from small beginnings, 
the pastime soon came to a free fight in right earnest, in which much water 
was splashed; then sand was thrown; and finally they began to beat one 
another using clay as the favourite missile. Some were taken in custody by the 
police on the spot, in the name of the King. Some escaped the royal officers 
across the Ganges after thrashing their adversaries. These performances acquired 
such violence and dimension that the entire stream of the Ganges was converted 
by them into a thick mixture of sand and clay. Women who came to fetch 



water were debarred from filling their pitchers, and Brahmanas and honest 
citizens from their legitimate baths. Lord Vishwambhar was the most turbulent 
of all. 

He made a systematic tour of all the bathing-places of the Ganges in this fashion. 
There was no dearth of scholars at any of the bathing-places (ghats). The Lord 
quarreled with them at every place. Swimming down with the current, the Lord 
visited all the bathing-places stopping to sport at each of them for some time. 

The senior boys were at last fain to ask Him why He was so extraordinarily 
quarrelsome. 'Let the youngsters,’ they said, ‘ask instead questions for 
testing one another’s knowledge. Only then it could be really known who 
possessed the correct information of his britti, panji and tika., The Lord 
welcomed their suggestion and invited all the urchins to put to Himself whatever 
questions they liked. One of the students protested saying that He ought not to be 
too boastful. The Lord only repeated His challenge to be asked any questions. 
The irate scholar forthwith demanded that the Lord would then and there 
expound all the formulae of verbal root. The Lord, desiring them to listen 
attentively, at once explained all the sutras in the correct manner. All the 
students praised His exposition. The Lord said that He would, however, refute all 
that He had said to them just then, challenging them to defend the very 
expositions which they had approved. They were struck dumb with astonishment 
on recognizing that the refutation was also flawless. He told them that He would 
re-establish the previous expositions and fully satisfied ever one by His 
explanations to that effect. 

The senior students were so highly pleased that they enthusiastically clasped 
Him to their bosoms. Then the boys took leave of Him for that day with 
the challenge that He should come prepared to answer their questions again 
the next day. The Lord of Vaikuntha indulged in these delightful sports in 
the stream of the Jahnavi tasting unceasingly the pleasures of learning. It 
seemed that the all-knowing Brhaspati with ah his disciples, indeed, appeared 
in Nabadwip for participating in these sports. Jahnavi’s heart’s desire was 
thus fulfilled at last. She had envied the superior fortune of her sister Sree 
Yamuna, in whose water Krishnachandra had sported in the Dvapara Age. 

Sree Gaursundar is verily the Purpose-tree that fulfills ah desires. He 
sported incessantly in her pure current. 


On His return home from these sportive performances in the sacred stream of the 



Ganges, the Lord, the ideal Brahmacharin, duly worshipped Vishnu and, having 
offered water to holy tulasi, beloved of Vishnu, sat down to His meal. As soon as 
meal was finished, the Lord retired to a secluded part of the house with His 
books. He made His own tippani (annotations) of the sutras of Kalapa Vyakarana 
and forgot everything else by the sweet taste of books. 

Misra noted this exemplary conduct of his Son and was filled with the highest 
happiness. He knew nothing but joy night and day. Every day he derived 
fresh and inexhaustible delight by looking on the Face of his Child. The joy of 
Misra cannot be expressed in words. He drank in the Beauty of his Son with 
such ardour that he all but merged in the Body of his Boy with his own frame 
and all individuality, the consummation so vainly wished by the pseudo- 
liberationists. 

But as a matter of fact, the joys of merging in the Divinity or of any other form 
of liberation are as nothing to the bliss of Jagannath Misra who had no 
occasion to think of those coveted trivialities. The Lord of all the worlds is the 
Son of Jagannath Misra. The eternal father of the Lord is the revered of all the 
devotees of the Supreme Lord. 

Misra experienced all the anxieties of this absorbing and exclusive love for his 
Boy. The marvellous Beauty of every Limb of Sree Gaursundar, surpassing 
the loveliness of the god of love himself, filled Misra with constant anxiety, lest 
his Son attracted the malignant attention of the witches and evil spirits. This 
fear drove Misra to quit all his claims on the Boy and make a complete surrender 
of Him to Krishna. Gaursundar laughed as He overheard the outpourings 
of Misra’s prayers. ‘Krishna,’ prayed Misra, ‘Thou are the Protector of all. Deign 
to cast Thy most auspicious Glance even on my Son. Danger never comes to 
the threshold of the person who remembers Thy Lotus Feet. Witches, ghosts 
and bodyless evil spirits haunt those places of sin that are void of the 
remembrance of Thee. Evil spirits carry their sinister influence to all places 
where selfish activities and fruitive sacrifices are performed in lieu instead of 
listening to the account of the Doings of Godhead which destroys the power of 
all evil-doers. Lord, I am Thy servant. May Thou protect all that belongs to me, 
as they are Thine. May no evil nor danger ever come near my Soul.’ This was 
the constant prayer of Sree Jagannath Misra. With both hands lifted in prayer he 
always supplicated Krishna for this only boon. 


One day Misra had a most wonderful dream which filled him with the utmost 



grief in the midst of all this happiness. Rising up in great anxiety 
Misra prostrated himself in obeisance, reciting the prayer, ‘Govinda, may my 
Nimai stay in my house. This is the only boon I pray from Thee, O Krishna, that 
my Nimai may be a householder and stay in the family.’ Sachi noticed this 
and being greatly surprised asked Misra the cause of his prayer offered to 
Krishna with such sudden anguish. Misra narrated to her the story of his vision. 

‘I have had a dream,’ said Misra, ‘as if Nimai had shaved His Head. I cannot 
describe His marvellous attire of sannyasin. He laughed, danced and wept, 
uttering continuously the Name of Krishna. Advaita Acharya and other 
devotees, forming a circle round Nimai, chanted the kirtan. Sometimes Nimai 
seated Himself on the throne of Vishnu and, holding up His Feet, put Them on 
the heads of all. Four-faced, five-faced, thousand-faced forms sang Victory to 
the Son of Sree Sachi. All recited hymns of praise to Him from every side with 
the greatest joy. I was dumb with fear at what I beheld. Then I saw that Nimai 
went along on His way dancing, through each and every town, taking with 
Him crores of people. Lakhs of crores of people ran after Nimai and sang the 
Name of Hari, Whose sound rang through the universe. I could hear on all sides 
only the praises of Nimai Who journeyed to Puri in the company of all those 
devotees. It is this most strange dream that has made me so anxious, lest the Boy 
leave the family through lack of attachment for things of this world.’ Sachi Devi 
did not think that there was any real ground for anxiety, notwithstanding the 
dream, as ‘the Boy was so completely engrossed in His books that the taste of 
learning had verily become the whole of His duty.’ The father and mother of the 
Lord were of a disposition that was utterly unselfish. They had between them 
many a discussion on the subject by reason of their exclusive love for their Son. 

In this manner Misra passed his days for some time longer and, thereafter, he 
withdrew his eternally pure form from the view of this world. The Lord 
wept much at the departure of Misra, like Sree Ramachandra on the 
disappearance of Dasaratha. The attraction of Sree Gaursundar is irresistible. 

The life of His mother was preserved thereby. It is a most affecting topic, and 
Thakur Brindavandas, our authority, stops abruptly, and confesses his inability to 
linger on the pathetic subject. 

The only point that remains to be noticed in this connection is the statement that 
the form of Sree Jagannath Misra is described as eternally pure and also that he 
withdrew himself from the view of the people of this world and did not die. In 
fact, the soul is also our only real body. The physical case is a 
temporary accretion as a corrective contrivance for curing our godlessness. But 



Sree Jagannath Misra, the father of Sree Gaursundar, is eternally pure plenary 
Divine Essence and has no physical body as there can be no godlessness in his 
case. What seemed to godless people as his physical body was really his eternal 
allholy spiritual form. The Father of Godhead, who is ever identical with 
his body, manifested himself in this world of matter, in obedience to the will 
of Godhead and for the purpose of participating in the Divine Activities when 
the Latter appear in this world. He remained visible in this world as long as his 
part was being played. He ceased to be visible after this function was fulfilled. 
His manifestation in this world was brought about by the Spiritual Power 
of Godhead and was a wholly spiritual affair, unlike the birth of sinful jivas, 
which is brought about by the deluding Power of God and is really transitory 
and insubstantial. Those, who suppose that there is no difference between 
this mortal body and the apparently similar bodies of the eternal devotees 
of Godhead when they manifest their appearance in this world, ignore thereby 
the eternal and categorical distinction between matter and spirit. To the 
material eye of the conditioned soul the body of a Vaishnava, when by the Grace 
of Godhead he becomes visible to him, may appear to be material, just as to 
a jaundiced eye everything seems to be yellow. The defective vision of the 
sinner is, however, solely responsible for this delusion. The deluded soul is 
not privileged to have the sight of the real form of the Vaishnava. The birth, 
death and activities of the Vaishnava, although they have an external 
resemblance to those of conditioned souls, are categorically different from the 
latter. It is only the spiritual eye, the eve of the pure soul, which can actually see 
this difference. 

The Sorrow of Sree Gaursundar at the disappearance of Misra was not also a 
delusion. It would, however, be a profane delusion, if we suppose that He 
felt sorry for the death of His father, like ordinary people of this world. To 
Him Jagannath Misra can never die. Nor can Misra ever disappear from the 
View of his Son. 

Therefore, neither of these can be the cause of the Sorrow of Sree Gaursundar. 
Sree Jagannath Misra’s anxiety on account of his Son, lest He became 
a sannyasin, and Sree Gaursundar’s Sorrow at the apparent disappearance of 
Sree Jagannath Misra, are instances of Divine Activities which are absolutely 
free from all taint of unwholesomeness, unlike the apparently similar activities 
of fettered souls which are altogether unwholesome. There is separation, pang 
of separation and anxiety at the prospect of separation, also in the 
Transcendental Realm of the Spirit. The conditions for this are supplied there by 



the Spiritual Power of the Divinity and are, therefore, also spiritual, that is, 
absolutely free from all unwholesomeness. This is inconceivable to the fallen 
jivas but is the only Reality obscured to the view of the latter by the joys and 
sorrows of the physical body and the materialized mind. In the realm of the 
Absolute, there is no break of existence but only the semblance of it, in order to 
heighten, diversify and enrich the positive joy of eternal existence. In regard to 
the things of this world the case is otherwise, and it is the greatest of mercies that 
this is so. Had it been otherwise, it would have only perpetuated the 
barren experience of mundane activities which are the trivial and 
unacceptable distortions of the facts of the eternal existence. The Absolute exists 
by Himself. This physical world has not only a relative but also superfluous, 
unwholesome and altogether subordinate existence. It is so, because everything 
is real in Godhead, although it is often both unnecessary and impossible for 
the individual soul to understand it, except in so far as it is actually divulged to 
his serving disposition by the mercy of the Supreme Lord. 



Chapter 8 Early Youth and Student Life 

The Lord still chose to remain self-concealed, passing His days mostly in the 
company of His mother. Sree Sachi Devi, in lieu of His father, now 
devoted herself exclusively to the service of the Boy. If she did not see her Son 
for the fraction of an hour, the power of sight left her eyes, and she would lose 
all selfconsciousness. The Lord also displayed constantly His love for His 
mother and consoled her with encouraging words. He bade her have no anxieties 
since He Himself belonged to her, and as He would supply all her wants and 
fetch for her, with ease, things that were obtainable with great difficulty by 
Brahma and Siva. As she gazed on the beautiful Face of the Child, Sachi Devi 
lost the memory of her bodily existence, not to speak of her sorrows. The Lord 
Himself, by the mere remembrance of Whom all wants are fulfilled, was ever 
present to her in the form of her own Son. How could, therefore, any bodily 
sorrows persist in her? The Lord made His mother the very soul of joy. 

There is no desire for selfish enjoyment in the realm of the Absolute 
(Vaikuntha). The servants of Godhead, who are the denizens of that 
Happy Realm, being always in the Presence of the Lord by reason of their 
entire dependence on Him, are altogether forgetful of their own selves. 

The inhabitants of this mundane world, due to their forgetfulness of Krishna, 
put their reliance on their own bodies, and are accordingly liable to cherish 
all those concerns that minister to its transitory pleasures. It is in this manner 
that fallen jivas by their own contrivance become subjected to the various 
miseries of this mundane world. There was no room for selfish grief in the pure 
heart of Sachi which was wholly occupied with love for Godhead. The eternal 
spiritual impulse of maternal affection for the Divine Child alone possesses the 
quality of causing complete forgetfulness of one’s own body. A worldly mother 
loves her son for her own selfish pleasure. This is also the case with the so-called 
love of a mundane wife for her husband. All such pretended attachments are 
impure by reason of their intrinsic selfishness which completely captures the 
mind the moment it is turned towards the objects of this world. 

The Lord Godhead, King of Vaikuntha, thus passed His days in Nabadwip in the 
form of a Brahmana Boy, in the Ecstatic Bliss of enjoying the moods of His own 
mind known only to Himself. In the home at Nabadwip the uttermost poverty 
prevailed. The Lord’s commands were ever worthy of the Lord Paramount of the 
highest gods. He did not care to know whether there was anything in the house. 



If whatever He demanded was not instantly supplied, it produced the most 
terrible consequences. He would immediately smash up everything, the house, 
doors and windows; and, in fact, nothing escaped the fury of His Anger. He was 
absolutely heedless of the damage done by Himself to His own property. But 
despite all mischief that was thus done continuously, Sachi Devi was always 
assiduous in supplying, with all care, whatever He asked for, by reason of her 
unmixed affection for her Son. 

On a certain day as the Lord was about to go out for His bath in the Ganges, He 
asked His mother for oil and ‘myrobalan’ and also for choice garlands of 
flowers and odoriferous sandal paste, as He wished to worship the holy Ganges 
with the said offerings after His bath. The mother implored Him to wait for a 
very short time to enable her to procure the garlands. No sooner did 
Sree Gaursundar catch her words that she was to bring the garlands from 
elsewhere, He became terrible as Rudra, the God of Destruction, in His sudden 
anger. 

With the words, ‘Would you then, indeed, go out for the garlands now?’ He 
entered His apartment raging furiously. Then first of all He vented His wrath 
on the earthen pots, in which the holy water from the Ganges was stored, 
and broke all of them. By the stroke of a big stick, He next broke deliberately 
all those pots which contained oil, ghee and salt. He then smashed all the pots, 
big and small, that happened to be in the room. Oil, ghee, milk, rice, cotton, 
paddy, salt, cakes of pulse, mudga, were mixed up together on the floor of the 
room. 

He then snatched away all the nets of rope for hanging up articles and tore them 
to shreds. All clothing that He found in the house shared the same fate. When 
there remained no article to break, the Lord’s anger turned against the house 
itself. He plied the big stick with both Hands on the house, no one venturing to 
utter a word of protest. Having smashed the doors and windows, He turned to the 
trees and treated them in the same fashion. In that mad fit of anger there was no 
disposition to forgive. When there remained no article to break, His stick 
showered blows on the very earth itself. 

All this while Sachi remained in a state of great fear, almost hiding herself 
behind a remote corner of the house. The Lord, the Establisher of 
religion Himself the Eternal Religion, did not lift His Hands against His 
mother. Although He was still fully disposed to manifest the fury of His wrath 



which knew no bounds, yet He did not go against His mother, nor try to hurt 
her. Having smashed all things, the Lord came out into the yard and rolled on 
the bare ground with an angry mind. His golden Body became enveloped in 
sand and was, it is hardly meet to divulge, a wondrous, beautiful Sight. 

After thus rolling frantically on the ground for some time, the Lord became 
motionless. As he lay in this quiet posture, the Lord glanced at the Power 
that lulls Him to slumber ( Yoga-maya) and the Lord of Vaikuntha did enjoy 
His Sleep on the bosom of the Earth. The Lord, Whose resting-place is the All- 
Holy Form of Sree Ananta Deva, Whose Lotus Feet are ever tended by Lakshmi 
Herself, the Object of quest of the four Vedas, slept in this fashion in the yard 
of Sachi ! The Ford, in the vesicle of Whose hair there lies afloat an infinitude 
of worlds, Whose servants have power to create, maintain and destroy, 

Whose Qualities Brahma, Siva and their peers sing with rapture, the Self-same 
Supreme Lord Himself thus reposed in a deep slumber in the yard of Sachi! The 
Supreme Lord slept on in the Bliss of His Own Consciousness. The Sight made 
the gods laugh and cry. 

After some time had passed, Sree Sachi Devi, having procured the garlands and 
made ready all requisites for the worship of the Ganges, laying her hand 
softly on the Body of her Son, tried to awaken Him by- gently wiping the dust 
from His Person. 'Wake up, my Darling,, said she, 'see, here are the garlands; 
take them for worshipping the Ganges even as Thou likest. It is well and good 
that Thou hast smashed all things of the house. Let it take away Thy 
Sorrows., Roused by these words of His mother, Sree Gaursundar, feeling 
ashamed at heart, set off for His bath without more ado. 

After the Lord had left, Sachi made all the rooms clean and prepared to cook His 
meal. Sachi did not feel the least sorrow in her mind, although the 
Lord habitually did such intolerable mischief. Sachi put up with all the 
waywardness of Sree Gaursundar in the same manner that Sree Yasoda bore the 
restless turn for mischief of Sree Krishna in the cowherd settlement. I have no 
power to record all the wayward acts of the Lord. But Sachi bore up with all 
those with unruffled patience of body, speech and mind, like mother earth 
herself. 

The playful Lord returned home after bath and, having worshipped Vishnu and 
offered water to tulasi, beloved of Vishnu, sat down to His meal. After meal 
the Lord appeared to be satisfied. He then performed achaman and began 



chewing betel. His mother then spoke gently. Tor what purpose, Darling, didst 
Thou do all this damage ? The house, doors, windows, all articles of the 
household are Thine. All the loss is Thine. It does not affect me. Even now Thou 
wilt be going off for Thy study. There is nothing in the house wherewith to buy 
anything. What wilt Thou eat tomorrow?’ Hearing these words of the mother the 
Lord laughed. ‘Krishna,’ said He, ‘nourishes; He will maintain.’ With this the 
Lord of the goddess of learning, book in hand, strolled off to His studies. 

A certain interval of time was passed in the joy of study, after which the Lord 
came to the bank of the Ganges in the evening. Having stayed there awhile, 
the Lord returned home. He then called His mother and taking her aside gave 
her two tolas of pure gold. ‘Mother,’ said He, ‘Krishna has given this stuff. 

By changing it, meet all necessary expenses.’ He then retired to bed. 

Sachi was filled with great astonishment. ‘Whence could He procure this gold 
He had been doing it pretty frequently of late. 

In fact whenever there was any want of money, He obtained gold in this manner. 
Was it likely to bode any danger ? Did He borrow or know some magical art? 
Whence, how, whose gold was thus brought?, These anxieties troubled the mind 
of Sachi which was untainted with greed in any form, being perfectly generous. 
She was also afraid of getting a change for such gold time and again. She always 
instructed the person; whom she entrusted the changing of it, to do so after he 
had shown it to a sufficient number of discreet people. 

Such conduct in any other boy, as old as Sree Gaursundar, if allowed free scope 
by his doting mother, would hardly appeal to the judgment of many persons 
as auguring any good for the future of the child. They would, at any rate, fail 
to find any decent apology for such excessive and unbounded material 
leniency. An unruly child is required to be handled, indeed, with tact but also 
with real firmness if he is to be prevented from getting out of hand. The conduct 
of Sree Sachi Devi and of Sree Yasoda does not fulfill this ideal of motherhood. 
Many a child, with an abundance of the animal spirit, have been altogether 
spoiled by the doting policy of unrestrained motherly indulgence. It should be 
very difficult, nay almost impossible, for dutiful worldly mothers to appreciate 
the maternal conduct of Sree Sachi Devi. 

Vaishnavism has been charged with the attempt to idolize sentimentalism of the 
most exaggerated type. Even if for the sake of argument sentimentalism 



be allowed to possess any outstanding value, it should still be necessary to keep 
it within natural bounds. The Vaishnava is apparently supposed to know no 
such limits. He seems to be ready to make a display of his feelings and to evince 
a great pleasure in carrying his heart on his sleeves. The practical and 
cognitive sides of one’s nature do not thus appear to receive their due 
recognition in the conduct that is extolled by the Vaishnavas as ideal, which 
displays an apparently sickening exuberance of the most effusive 
sentimentalism. This is doubly inexplicable as coming from persons who 
deprecate all sensuousness. 

I think it would not be fair to my readers if I do not avail myself of the first 
opportunity of trying to clear up misapprehensions that are apt to be entertained 
even by unprejudiced persons in reward to this feature of Vaishnavism. 

Most worldly people identify, religion with morality. Ordinary morality aims at 
serving the jiva by ensuring for his mundane body and mind an ever- 
increasing fund of sensuous enjoyment. A child is subjected to rules of discipline 
in order to aid the realization of the above object. Waywardness has to be 
checked, lest it becomes a habit which may stand in the way of the worldly well¬ 
being of the child when he grows up. Morality would not be valued and is 
ignored on principle, whenever it is actually opposed to the worldly interest. The 
instinct which seems to claim for it an absolute value, is apt to be stifled by the 
voice of the worldly reason, which secures its victory by pointing to the 
uncertain, transitory enjoyable consequences of any absolute rule of practice. 

There are also those who have tried to prove that the moral instinct itself is the 
product of those untoward material circumstances which it is set up to 
correct. The Absolute is thus altogether ruled out, and the purely temporary 
object is substituted in His place, a procedure which has given to the empiric 
science of ethical conduct its so-called ‘practical’ and definitely worldly 
character. The rule of expediency has been openly adopted as the final principle 
of rational human conduct, the object being the amelioration of worldly wants 
and the consequent extension of worldly happiness. It is taken for granted that 
there is nothing beyond our present pleasures of this world that need be 
considered as really valuable. This scheme undoubtedly possesses the qualities 
of clearness and apparent feasibility. It is admittedly incomplete, as it professes 
to be ignorant of many things. But if it be identified with religion, it 
becomes necessary to suppose that there is a dead void beyond the activities of 
this world, as they, are practiced by the majority of us. This would be 



inconsistent with the ideal ordinarily professed to be cherished by the empiric 
moralists. 


But it may be urged that, even if morality is not wholly identifiable with religion, 
it should not, therefore, be also ignored by the latter. If it be pleaded that 
morality, in the above sense, forms an integral part of religion, this would also be 
illogical. Such proposition really begs the question to be proved. The whole 
scheme of morality is based on a definite and unwarrantably narrow view of life. 
Is it logical to insist that such narrowness should be allowed to remain intact 
even after the view of life has been infinitely widened. All we can insist on is 
that morality must be incorporated in Religion in so far as its retention may not 
defeat the purpose of Religion. We cannot insist that it must not be enlarged, 
while admitting that expansion is not mere destruction or involving the loss of 
any wholesome interest. 

It is not asserted that no evil consequences, in the worldly sense, can result from 
the licensed extreme waywardness of an earthly child due to fond indulgence 
shown to such a Child by a doting earthly mother. A man of this world will be 
punished, if he breaks any law of this world. One, who is in quest of worldly 
pleasures, will not gain ( ?) them by neglecting to follow the course apparently 
laid down by God Himself for their attainment. A wayward child, who merely 
refuses to submit to the laws of physical Nature, will incur and deserve the 
punishment that is attached to such conduct by such law. On the other hand, one 
who does not desire to enjoy material pleasures is also punished as he chooses to 
go against the laws of Nature. It is not possible for any possessor of the physical 
body and limited mind to be immune from the operation of the laws of physical 
Nature. 

But Sree Gaursundar and Sree Sachi Devi, although they may appear to us to be 
like the people of this world, really belong to the transcendental sphere. They act 
in accordance with the innate freedom of that higher realm. It would be unwise, 
therefore, for us, while we are situated in this world, to try to imitate their 
conduct or to condemn it for the mere reason that it does not correspond to the 
ideal of mortals. They are beings of another world, endowed with other and 
higher natures, who have chosen to appear in our midst, independently of the 
laws of this world. Therefore, what we have to do is to try to learn about that 
other world from what they say and do. That would be the proper and logical 
attitude on our part. We must by no means try to imitate them. We shall be 
punished by the laws of this world, if we try to do so. 



In that transcendental world waywardness need not be checked, as no evil 
consequences are produced, everything being perfectly pure and harmonical and 
incapable of being curtailed by hostile conflict with anything else. Our souls in 
their normal state are the denizens of that happy realm. We have been hurled into 
this nether world by our disinclination to avail ourselves the freedom of that 
world. We can regain our natural state of purity and unalloyed bliss, if only we 
agree to accept the Higher Law. Godhead and His beloved ones come down into 
this world to remind us of our true native land and enlighten us regarding the 
cause of our exile therefrom. The words of the people of the Spiritual Realm are 
identical with their conduct. Both mean the same thing. Godhead and His 
beloved ones come down into this world to tell fallen jivas the tidings of 
Vaikuntha and, lest they misunderstand their words by supposing them to refer to 
the things and conditions of this world, Godhead makes All His Activities of 
Vaikuntha visible to mortal eyes. Even a mortal can see them with the eye of 
faith, that is to say., if he is disposed to love and obey Godhead which is the only 
law of the Spiritual Realm, on the contrary, if we seek to please ourselves, those 
very visible Divine Activities represent only their deluding, i.e., seemingly 
worldly, face to us. 

Common misapprehensions in regard to Vaishnavism owe their origin mainly to 
that natural aversion to Godhead which is the sedulously cultivated 
second nature of all fallen jivas, and partly to the misleading activities of the 
pseudo-Vaishnavas who, in the state of sin, imitate, without caring to understand 
its real significance, the external conduct of the true devotees of Godhead. 

The conduct of the true devotees of Krishna is always perfect and combines in 
itself, without necessitating the least curtailment, the principles of knowing, 
willing and feeling in the fullest harmonious measure. To us who are wholly 
sensuous, the Perfectly Pure Activities of God necessarily appear as being also 
wholly sensuous. They are, however, absolutely pure and without any mundane 
defect. But this can be fully realized only by the soul who is himself free from 
all earthly taint. The Activities of Godhead and His devotees rebound to 
our lasting good, if they are approached with a serving disposition as 
manifestations of the Divinity by the method of listening to the account of them 
from the lips of the true devotees of Godhead. By this method and this method 
alone we, fallen jivas, may be enabled to understand their real meaning and 
thereby learn to obey Krishna. If they are approached for any other purpose, they 
only show their deluding face to us. The pseudo-Vaishnavas are as much more 
deluded than even those who are openly and frankly skeptical. Both are equally 
attached to the pleasures of this world; but the former further try to extend the 



scope of their sensuous enjoying propensities also towards spiritual matters. 
They seek to procure sensuous pleasure by aping deliberately the performances 
of the sadhus with fatal consequences both for themselves and their followers. 
The skeptics are right in holding the pseudo-religionists to be worse 
than themselves; but they certainly carry their aversion to undue lengths 
by supposing that the true worship of Godhead, described in the Scriptures, 
is itself non-existent or harmful. This is the real punishment of Such 
worldly skepticism. 

The Supreme Lord, Who could have easily disarmed the opposition of all the 
people, even the most skeptical, by the display of His Divine powers, chose 
to remain in obscurity, and went on with His Pastimes, in this manner 
at Nabadwip. At this period He never left off His books for a single moment. 

He was most assiduous in His studies in the company of the other students 
among whom He could be easily distinguished by His extraordinarily 
beautiful Appearance. He looked as if the god of love himself had become 
manifest on this earth. His Appearance of this period is thus described by 
Thakur Brindavandas: ‘The beautiful tilaka mark, pointing in an upward 
direction, adorned His Forehead. The profusion of curly hair that graced His 
Head captivated the minds of all beholders. The sacrificial thread was 
placed gracefully across His Shoulder. He was the Living Form of the fiery 
Brahmana spirit. His cheerful and beautiful Face was always covered with 
smiles. His Teeth were perfectly pure. The pair of His lotus Eyes were 
inexpressibly wonderful. His Cloth, worn with a triple kachcha, was a thing of 
most marvellous beauty. Whoever beheld Him gazed on His Beauty and found 
it impossible to take away their eyes from Him. There was no one who did 
not pay Him the tribute of his unstinted praise.’ 

The wonderful manner of His expositions filled His teacher with unbounded joy. 
His teacher, leading Him by his own hands, made Him occupy the highest seat 
among all his pupils. The teacher said, “My Dear, read attentively. I strongly 
declare that Thou shalt be the Greatest of Teachers.” The Lord replied, “Is the 
position of the Greatest of Teachers difficult to be attained by One Who has your 
blessing” 

No student could answer the questions of the Lord. He Himself settled the 
interpretation of the sutras and then refuted His own explanations. And when no 
one was able to establish the right meaning, the Lord explained the text in the 
proper manner. The Lord had no other thoughts except the Shastras, whether at 



His bath, at His meal or in His walks. 


The Lord thus came to be looked up to as almost their Teacher by the pupils of 
Pandit Gangadas. Early in the morning, after performing the sandhya 
ceremony, the Lord went out to study in the company of all His students. He 
then took His seat at the assembly-hall of Gangadas Pandit and was constantly 
engaged in polemical discussions in opposing or supporting propositions that 
might be advanced. The Lord always deprecated those students who did not 
avail themselves of His Teaching, mercilessly using every opportunity to expose 
their ignorance. After study with Pandit Gangadas the Lord expounded the texts 
to the pupils. The leading students, each with his group of junior followers, 
sat round the Lord in different rows, all with the solitary exception of Murari 

Gupta who alone refused to be coached by the Lord, for which reason the Lord 
was never tired of exposing his defects. 

While explaining lessons to the students, the Lord sat in the centre wearing his 
cloth in the style of Yogapatta and in the posture of the seated 
warrior (beerasana). The upward tilaka mark of sandal-paste adorned His 
Lorehead. 

The glow of the rows of His charming Teeth put to shame the lustre of pearls. 
The Lord was in His sixteenth year in the bloom of budding youth. His 
beauty enchanted the god of love himself. He displayed a scholarship that was 
deemed superior to that of the celestial sage. He ridiculed all who did not study 
under Him. He was very proud of His learning and would challenge everybody 
to refute His conclusions. He often declared that those, who did not know how 
to combine two words by the process of sandhi (compounding), dared to set up 
as expounders of the texts in order to console themselves with the idle vanity 
that they could really understand the books by their unaided intelligence. 

Many persons unfortunately turned out fools by reason of such vanity 
which prevented them from learning from their betters. 

This was intended for Murari Gupta who would remain silent and obdurate even 
under this severe castigation. But the Lord always loved to poke His servant 
whose sight filled Him with joy. The Lord would ask Murari, who belonged to 
the vaidya caste, to betake himself to his legitimate trade of healing sick persons, 
by giving up study: ‘The Vyakarana Shastra was difficult in the extreme. There 
was no prescription in it for phlegm, bile or indigestion, what will you 



understand of it by your assiduous cogitations ? Better go back home and treat 
your patients.’ 

Murari, though of a fighting temperament was prevented from being angry by 
looking at Vishwambhar, and only replied, “What a great personage ! You 
poke everybody and brag a good deal. You are author of sutra, britd, panji, tika, 
etc. But did You ever fail to get a reply to Your questions from me? Without 
asking any questions You say, ‘What dost thou know?, You are Brahmana and 
worthy of my reverence. What can I say?” The Lord said, ‘Explain then what 
you have read to-day.’ As Gupta began to construe, the Lord began to refute. 
Gupta explained in one sense, the Lord expounded in another. The Master and 
the servant were equally matched and neither could score a decisive victory. 

Gupta was most profoundly learned by the power of the Lord. The Lord was 
delighted by hearing his explanations. Being pleased, the Lord touched his 
body with His Lotus Hand and forthwith the whole frame of Murari was thrilled 
with joy. The thought flashed in the heart of Murari Gupta, ‘This Person is never 
a man of this earth. Such scholarship is also impossible in man. By the Touch 
of His Hand one’s body becomes full of transcendental bliss. There is 
no humiliation to study under Him. In the whole of Nabadwip there is not 
another who possesses such excellent understanding.’ The worthy Gupta being 
highly pleased said, ‘I say, Vishwambhar, I agree to study under Thee.’ Godhead 
and His devotee ever engage in such blissful Pastimes. They went off to bathe in 
the Ganges after this learned encounter, in the company of all the 
students. Godhead Himself tasted the delights of study in this manner, as 
Student. 

These details have been handed down by the associates of Sree Chaitanya, 
regarding His Student Career. Study divorced from religion is not 
only considered now-a-days to be useful, but also as a necessity. Religion, 
which appeals to ‘authority,’ is supposed to be the antipode of that ‘freedom 
of thought’ which is considered necessary for really successful pursuit 
of knowledge. Knowledge is never pursued for its own sake. In 
gathering knowledge we suppose to make use of a faculty which the Great God 
has mercifully bestowed upon us for our physical and mental improvement. 

This may also be supposed to be corroborated by the conduct of Nimai as 
Student. 


He also devoted Himself whole-heartedly to the acquisition of secular 



knowledge, e.g., Grammar, which is the science of language. He rebelled 
against His parents, when He was a mere Child, when they stopped His secular 
studies. He was the terror of all the students for His acumen in purely 
secular controversy. Does all this look like tame submission on His Own Part 
to authority by relegation of freedom of thought? It is true He led the life of 
the ideal Brahmacharin and daily worshipped Vishnu and honoured the tulasi 
and mahaprasada. But those did not prevent Him from the undiluted pursuit 
of purely secular studies. His method as well as object as student may thus 
appear to be identical in practice with those of modern pedagogics. 

Why did He find fault with everybody and specially the teachers ? He boasted 
that no one could meet His objections, nor refute His interpretation. The evident 
implication is that according to Him all those teachers were wandering in a maze 
of errors. Even as Student He wanted all persons, including the Professors 
themselves, to learn from Him, and not to depend on themselves. We have the 
recorded testimony of the Vaishnavas of that period that the learned Professors 
were no less deeply engrossed than others in the pursuit of worldly objects. This 
plan was also carried into their Academies in which, in place of the pursuit of 
Truth, was substituted the dissociated study of different secular subjects, such 
anarchy being mistaken for real freedom. The result was the absolute want of all 
real scholarship and the utter disregard of the only proper object of all studies. 
The conclusions of such spurious scholarship only confirmed the reign of 
ignorance. Nimai had no respect at all for this system or its products. 

European psychologists have tried to establish the rationale of the exclusive 
pursuit of isolated branches of knowledge, by their denial of the very 
existence of a soul who is located beyond the jurisdiction of the mind. They 
make the limited mind identical with the soul. They want to add to the 
defective equipments of the mind. This they call spiritual effort, as in their 
opinion the mind is identical with the soul. The mind, thus furnished with 
knowledge, is regarded as being thereby rendered more capable of successfully 
performing the various duties of this life. One’s duties are also supposed to be 
properly performed, if the worldly consequences of one’s acts are duly 
considered and provided for, the object again being to obtain the maximum 
pleasant results in the worldly sense. The mind, which lives, moves and has its 
being in this World, is to be enabled to do all this in such manner that it may not 
only fall foul of the laws of Nature, but may avail itself of them for overcoming 
the unpleasant possibilities represented by those very laws. The policy 
may properly be described as the application of the principle of ‘divide and rule, 



to Nature. This mastery over, or enjoyment of, physical Nature, according 
to fashionable Philosophy, is the goal of spiritual progress. 

The Pandits of Nabadwip of the time of Sree Chaitanya were famous for their 
learning and also for their aversion to Krishna. They had no idea of 
obeying ‘authority,’ that is to say, of serving anybody excepting themselves. The 
means, whereby this result was to be achieved, might have been more defective 
than now-a-days, as was to be expected in that comparatively backward Age. 

Their exclusive pursuit of Grammar, Logic and such ‘abstract’ subjects was the 
cause of their lack of worldly ‘prosperity,’ as was also the case in other 
countries in the mediaeval period. The pursuit of scientific knowledge by the 
methods of observation and induction has ensured the wonderful material 
progress of the present day. The agreement between empiric method and object, 
which was then lacking, has been effected with greater success by the ‘free’ 
efforts of the human mind during the last four centuries. Might not Sree 
Chaitanya’s objection to the comparatively barren pursuits of the Pandits of His 
day have been due to His perception of this defeat in the systems of the studies 
of His time ? 

Let us take a hypothetical case. Let us suppose that we possessed a vision that 
enabled us to find out the details of the operation of all the laws of Nature. 

What use would we then make of this knowledge? Would we try to submit to 
those laws or control them by making them oppose one another? Why should we 
consider it our duty to be able to do either? In what way does it profit us ? 

It would be excellent amusement to be able to manipulate Nature in the way 
we like. But why do we at all desire to do it? Would we be really satisfied by 
the temporary seeming possession of this power ? It would not enable us 
to eliminate our bodily and mental sufferings. It would only modify them. 

But such modification, in itself, would also be an equally intolerable suffering, if 
we are thereby doomed to live perpetually under limiting conditions of that sort. 

So we arrive at no satisfying goal of our efforts by the method of merely 
modifying the opportunities of material enjoyment, mental or physical, which is 
the professed and exclusive object of the empiric scientists. 

Did Sree Chaitanya only want us to follow this so-called advanced scientific 
method and object? Did He want us to be more engrossed in material 



pursuits? The Pandits of that time had made great progress in the sciences of 
abstract Logic and Grammar. It would be difficult even at the present day to 
suggest any considerable improvement of the knowledge they then possessed of 
those subjects. Modern science has put its seal of approval on the 
abstruse speculations, in those fields, of the ancients although it has 
supplemented them by the methods of more careful observation of phenomena 
on which all empiric knowledge is supposed to be based. 

The science of Indian Grammar is apparently one of the greatest triumphs of 
inductive generalization from observed phenomena. Sree Chaitanya seems 
to have objected neither to the empiric method nor to the subject of 
investigation. His objection applied to the interpretation. Interpretation means 
the establishment of the connection of a subject with the self. The 
interpretations of Nimai were true. The interpretations of everybody else were 
fallacious. In the absence of the right interpretation, all so-called knowledge 
remains external to the self and is liable to be used in a way that is harmful to the 
self. The right interpretation of phenomena can be known by the mercy of 
Godhead and learnt only by submission to Him. Without this allegiance to the 
Supreme Lord, all so-called knowledge becomes only a dangerous delusion, 
although we, in the unsubmissive state, are not properly aware of this. We shall 
presently learn more regarding this matter, when we consider the Activities of 
Nimai as Professor of the Real Science of Grammar. 



Chapter 9 Professor Life and Marriage 


Nimai now set up His own Academy in the Hall (mandap) of the family temple 
of the goddess Chandi which formed part of the frontal division of the residence 
of Mukunda-Sanjaya, a person of great good fortune and an opulent citizen of 
Nabadwip. The whole family of Mukunda-Sanjaya was devoted to the Lord. The 
spacious Chandi-Mandap accommodated a very large number of students. The 
Lord organised the body of His students into a school and taught them at this 
place. Thus was formed the Academy under Sree Gauranga as Professor for the 
pursuit of learning. 

The variety of Nimai Pandit’s interpretations and refutations knew no limit. In 
these erudite performances the Professors of Nabadwip were a standing subject 
of His regrets. He used to say that in the Iron Age those, who were ignorant of 
the elementary process of joining together two syllables (sandhi), which forms 
the opening chapter of the science of language, passed themselves off as 
Professors of the Shastras. “I challenge them to expose My mal-interpretations. I 
would admit they deserve their high-sounding designations of ‘Bhatta’ and 
‘Misra,’ if they can point out any flaws in my interpretations” The learned 
performances of all the Professors were declared to be 'only tissues of elaborate 
falsehoods which prevented them from realising the necessity of learning about 
the Truth by submission to Feet of Truth Himself. If those learned men had 
possessed the requisite degree of sincerity and clearness of thinking, they would 
have been inquisitive to know what He had to tell them.’ But they were perfectly 
content with their ephemeral and misleading speculations and did not feel the 
least inclination even to give a hearing to their Challenger. 

So it is not the manipulation of so-called material advantages by the pursuit of 
the different branches of empiric study that can rescue empiric learning from the 
charge of mischievous worthlessness. The relation of empiric learning itself to 
the Truth and to oneself must be grasped, if it is to be of any real use to a person. 
The absence of this knowledge vitiated the whole thing ab initio. It is owing to 
this fundamental defect that such studies only added to the delusions of 
obstinately ignorant persons. If those studies had been conceived and carried out 
in the proper spirit, they would have certainly led them to the Truth. But the real 
object and method of study are hidden from the view of deliberately ignorant 
persons and the knowledge of them can be had only from those who know about 
Him by unconditional submission at His Holy Feet. The Professors of Nabadwip 



did not know this, and their interminable labours accordingly only served to 
multiply their delusions and falsehoods which led their pupils and themselves 
farther away from the Truth Who is admittedly the Only Goal of all learning. 

Sree Sachi Devi now bethought of finding a suitable bride for her youthful Son. 
There lived at Nabadwip a most worthy Brahmana of the name of Sree Ballabha 
acharya who managed his household in the spirit of King Janaka of yore. He had 
a daughter whose name was Lakshmi and who was the same as Sree Lakshmi 
Devi of Vaikuntha. The Brahmana constantly thought of a suitable Husband for 
his daughter. Lakshmi was well-known to Sree Sachi Devi and Nimai Himself. 

Kaviraj Goswami has recorded the following incident of the Boyhood of Nimai 
in his work Sree Chaitanya-charitamrta. In His Boyhood Nimai was 
extremely turbulent and a source of trouble to everybody. He took particular 
delight in teasing the people while they were in the act of bathing in the Ganges. 
The details of these occurrences, as described by Thakur Brindavandas, have 
already been reproduced. Nimai, as we saw, did not spare even the girls from 
His turbulent attentions. One day as the daughter of Ballabha acharya 
was preparing to worship the gods after her bath in the Ganges, the Lord saw 
her and felt an inclination to make her acquaintance. Lakshmi also was delighted 
to see the Lord. The love between Lakshmi and the Supreme Lord is eternal. 

It now manifested itself under the guise of childish behaviour. They 
expressed Their mutual joy under pretence of worshipping the gods. The Lord 
said to her, ‘Worship Me. I am the Great Lord (Maheshwara). By worshipping 
Me you will get such Husband as you wish to have.’ Lakshmi accordingly placed 
on His Body flowers sprinkled with the sandal-paste and did reverence by 
putting on Him garlands made of the mallika flower. The Lord began to laugh 
on receiving her devotion and accepted the desire of her heart by reciting 
the shloka of the Bhagavatam spoken by Sree Krishna to the milkmaids, 

‘Loyal maidens, I have become aware of the meaning of your worship which 
has. indeed, given Me very great pleasure. Your hopes are worthy of fulfilment.’ 

The Lord also wished to perform the duties enjoined by the Shastras on a 
householder, as He was now settled in the household life. The spiritual duties of 
a householder cannot be discharged properly without co-operation of a helping 
female partner. The Lord accordingly conceived the desire of entering the state 
of matrimony. In the words of the Smriti, ‘the house itself is not called the 
household. The mistress is the real household. Being united to her by marriage a 
person attains the four coveted objects of life, viz., the proper performance of his 



duties, necessaries, objects of desire and liberation.’ 


While He was in this mood, the Lord accidentally came across the daughter of 
Ballabha acharya on her way to the Ganges. He was then returning home 
from His studies. The sight kindled, in the hearts of both, the love that 
already existed there in its perfection. The Lord smiled as He met His Own 
Lakshmi. Sree Lakshmi Devi also greeted in her mind the Twin Lotus Feet of the 
Lord before They went back to their respective homes. ‘Who, asks 
Thakur Brindavandas, ‘can understand the Pastimes of Sree Gaursundar ?’ 

The institution of marriage, as every other institution, misses its proper object if 
it does not serve the Supreme Lord. The prospect of carnal enjoyment, which the 
institution seems, to the ungodly, to offer, is the snare that requires to be most 
carefully avoided. The Union of Lakshmi and Narayana is the Source of 
ali manifest and non-manifest existence. Sree Narayana is the only Lord of 
all created things. He creates through the medium of Sree Lakshmi Devi. 

This eternal Marriage of Sree Lakshmi Narayana is hidden from the view of 
mortals by the shadow of the desire for carnal enjoyment falling across their 
vision. 

The Shastric institution of marriage is intended to reclaim bound jivas from the 
deadly slough of carnality. If they follow the life enjoined by the Shastras for the 
married state, they will thereby be enabled to progress towards freedom from the 
fascination of carnality. The bound jiva, misled by his sensuous hankering and 
preferring his own selfish enjoyment to the constant and eternal service of his 
Lord, is, of course, free to speculate about the advantages and disadvantages of 
the institution of marriage from the purely secular point of view. But such 
speculative attitude, however carefully one may try to guard oneself against the 
natural and inevitable consequences of carnality, will only forge a stronger chain 
to bind him to an unnatural and miserable existence. 

The external gloss supplied by godless speculation only aggravates the real 
mischief by hiding the unspirituality of all empiric conceptions of one’s 
duty. The Greek opinion that the gods are opposed to the happiness of man 
through malice is true in this sense. The gods always try to prevent the 
sensuous happiness of man. This is most beneficial in its possible results for 
humanity. The so-called happiness for which man hankers is but gilded misery, 
because the soul in the conditioned state understands and cares only for the 
things of this world. This is the disease to which all people of this world are 



subject. This malady is increased if the cause of it is strengthened. By increased 
hankering for new opportunities of material enjoyment, the cause of the malady 
is not likely to be removed. 

The quest of happiness itself is not unnatural. But if we want to be happy, we 
must first of all try to understand what can make us truly happy. Desire 
for sensuous enjoyment is the cause of unhappiness. Abstinence from 
such enjoyment also will not do, as it leads to a worse form of misery. Desire to 
serve the Lord for the sake of service can alone make us happy. Every activity 
can give us happiness to the extent that it is really service of Godhead, or, in 
other words, to the extent that it tends to absolute subimission to Him. 

The marriage of Lakshmi and Narayana does not belong to the category of the 
carnal marriage of sensuous jivas The marriage of the fettered jivas 
becomes successful, according to the Shastras, only if it succeeds in reclaiming 
them from the bondage of carnality. When this result is actually produced 
by faithfully following the injunctions of the Shastras, there should 
necessarily remain no carnal desire in such persons and, therefore, no further 
sensuous necessity of such bodily union. This is, however, only the negative 
result. By the elimination of carnality one also gets rid of the delusion that the 
soul can be either male or female, or have any sex in the worldly sense. No 
individual soul can be an object of reciprocal enjoyment of another individual 
soul, either as male or as female. Spiritual love for Godheasd is the sole Enjoyer 
and the jiva is the object of His exclusive enjoyment. Godhead is the only Lover, 
the jiva belongs to the category of His beloved. Godhead is the Possessor of 
power, the jiva is a particle of His obeying power. 

The jiva, as an inintegfrated particle of Krishna’s power, can be truly cognisant 
of Krishna as the sole Proprietor of himself. But the jiva is not the direct plenary 
Power of Krishna, but a detached particle of His Plenary Power. The Integrated 
Plenary Power of Krishna is eternally and unswervingly obedient to Krishna and 
never loses sight of Him. The jiva can be cognisant of Krishna only, if he 
submits to function in the line of the direct Power under the latter’sdirection. 
subordination to the direct Power of Krishna, in the case of the jiva, is the same 
as subordination to Krishna Himself Who is not directly cognisable by him. Sree 
Lakshmi devi is the Plenary Power of Krishna. Through her Krishna manifests 
Himself to His dissocxiated particles of His Power. The jiva may become a 
conscious partner in this process, if he subordinates his freedom of will, a gift of 
the Divinity, to the direction of the Will of Krishna, manifested for his guidance 



through Sree Ladshmi Devi. Sree Lakshmi devi is the consort of Sree Narayana, 
and the jiva, in his proper nature, is the eternal servitor of sree Narayana, under 
Sree Lakshmi devi as a detached particle of Her Essence. This cannot be realised 
by the bound jiva til he wakes to his true nature and is thereby freed from all 
taint of mundane sensuous hankerings. 

The marriage of Godhead, as every other Act of His, is identical with Godhead 
and as such is an object of our worship. The instinct of sexuality, that is so strong 
in all fallen jivas, is the peverted reflection of the highest function of his real 
nature which seeks eternally to subordinate herself to Godhead through serving 
love. This spiritual impllse of serving love appears in bound jivas in 
the unwholesome perverted form of lust seeking for its own gratification. This 
is, indeed, the worst of all the perversions appearing in this world and also the 
one that is the most difficult to get rid of. Man and woman in this world 
understand well enough the process of exploiting one another’s liust for the 
reciprocal gatification of their senses. They choose to think gratuitously that, as 
God Himself has endowed them with the sexual impulse, it must, therefore, be 
also His intention that it is their duty to avail of the opportunity so 
mercifully provided. Moderate and well-considered sexuality thus comes to be 
wrongly regarded as a part and parcel of our proper nature and the institution 
of marriage for the carnal purpose is looked upon as providing the convenient 
and proper conditions for the exercise of this lefitimate God-given impulse. 

The idea of a human being without any sexual weakness hence comes to 
be regarded with the greatest suspicion, being considered as either an 
impossibility or an abnormality. 

But as a matter of fact carnal sexuality is not any impulse of our higher nature, It 
is a hankering for material enjoyment which can, by its nature, only 
gratifyor disgust the material body and mind which have no substantive kinship 
with the soul. The corresponding pure spiritual impulse is completely free from 
the desire of any selfish enjoyment. Our soul possesses spiritual senses 
which abstain from seeking their own gratification by a spontaneous tendency. 
They want to provide, and not to intercept for themselves, all enjoyments for 
the Divinity. This service on the spiritual plane has no grossness or impurity 
which we, from our experience of the corresponding material process, associate 
with the object of carnal marriage. 

The marriage of individual souls with Godhead is the establishment of 
unreserved spiritual reciprocal communion with the Divinity which 



is confusedly reflected in an unwholesome and inverted form in the 
sexual impulse of this world. The realisation of the most intimate 
spiritual communion is the fulfilment of the same spiritual impulse. The pursuit 
of sexual gratification of oneself is the obstacle in the way of such realisation 
and is, in fact; the greatest punishment that is suffered by the jiva by reason of 
his desire for enjoyment. 

God does not accept the carnal sentiment, which is the worst form of aversion to 
Godhead, an act of personal disloyalty to the sole Enjoyer of all the 
spiritual senses of the jiva whose highest function consists in serving the Lord 
with all his spiritual senses. This spiritual service is available to the jiua, only if 
he happens to be in the state of perfect subordination to Godhead under 
the unconditional direction of Sree Lakshmi Devi, the Plenary Power Who is 
the Eternal Consort of the Lord. Sree Narayana communes directly with 
Sree Lakshmi Devi and the latter carries out the Divine Will in an infinity of 
ways. The jiva is enabled to commune with Godhead as a particle of the 
gratuitous extension of the Divine process by submitting to be a humble agent of 
Sree Lakshmi Devi Who is entitled to impart to him, for the purpose, a particle 
of the pure impulse by which She ever serves Her sole Lord. This is the 
most intimate reciprocal communion, or spiritual marriage, of the jiva with 
the Divinity. Those, who cherish the marriage of Lakshmi and Narayana, are 
by such devotion freed from the fell delusion of carnal sexuality on the 
attainment of the reciprocal spiritual communion with Divinity, which is the very 
highest form of service for the jiva. The fallen jiva is prepared to admit, at any 
rate in practice, the inexorable penal laws of physical Nature, but, with 
strange perversity, is viciously disposed to oppose as irrational the existence of 
the far more inexorable code of love that regulates the affairs of the spiritual 
world. 

But the Authority of Godhead is no less Absolute in the realm of spirit than it is 
in this prison-house of the physical world. The scientists try to 
understand, without questioning their rationale, the absolute potency, or 
authority, of the laws of this material universe. It is necessary to carry the same 
rational attitude into all enquiries regarding the spiritual world where, however, 
the laws of this physical world cannot prevail. The scientific spiritual method for 
attaining to the knowledge of the spiritual world, should, therefore, by strict 
analogy, also possess the following order of development, viz., (1) actual 
perception of the spiritual world, (2) gathering of spiritual experience, (3) 
analysis of such experience, (4) acquisition of right conduct by assimilated 



knowledge. As the spiritual realm happens to be wholly unknown to us, we must 
be disposed to take the help of the experience of those who have access to it, if 
we hope to have even the initial working knowledge of its conditions during this 
short span of human life. All this is in strict analogy with the method of 
empiric science. 

On the very day that Sree Gaursundar met Lakshmi Devi, a Brahmana 
matchmaker (match-making by the way was then an honoured offce as it should 
be) who bore the name of Banamali acharya, providentially made his 
appearance before Sachi Devi. The Brahmana, after making his obeisance to 
mother Sachi, accepted a seat which was cordially offered by her. Thereafter 
Banamali acharya broached his proposal: ‘It was high time for her to think about 
the Marriage of her Son. Sree Ballabha acharya, who also lived at Nabadwip, 
offered an unexceptionable connection as regards family, character and piety of 
life. His Daughter was the goddess Lakshmi Herself by the fame of Her beauty 
and disposition. Sachi Devi might accept this connection if she deemed it 
desirable.’ Mother Sachi replied, ‘My Son is a fatherless Boy. Let Him live and 
study. I am not thinking of any other thing just now.’ The Brahmana felt 
utterly discouraged by this dry rejoinder and left with a heavy heart. 

Banamali Acharya fell in with the Lord on His way back from His Academy, 
Who embraced him by way of merriment. The Lord asked where he had 
been. The Brahmana said he had been to His mother to propose His Marriage. 

He could not understand why she did not take it at all seriously. On hearing of 
this the Lord became silent. He took His leave of him with a smile and 
returned home. He laughingly asked His mother why she had not received the 
acharya in a gracious manner. Sachi was delighted on catching the hint from her 
Son and sent for the Brahmana on the day following. She then said to him, 

‘Settle as expeditiously as possible the affair that you mentioned yesterday.You 
have my full consent.’ 

Thereupon, taking the dust of the feet of Sachi, the Brahmana immediately set 
out for the home of Ballabha acharya. When Banamali Ghatak presented himself 
before Ballabha acharya the latter received him with great respect. Having 
accepted a seat duly offered by Ballabha acharya, Banamali proceeded to ask 
him forthwith to fix an auspicious day for the marriage of his Daughter. 

‘The Son of Purandar Misra, by Name Bishwambhar, most learned and 
possessed of all good qualities, was the only eligible Bridegroom for 



his daughter.’ That was also the proposal which Banamali had to make to him. 

He accordingly advises Ballabha Acharya to accept the same, provided, of 
course, it really commended itself to him. 

Ballabha acharya was filled with the greatest joy on receiving the proposal. He 
said that such a Son-in-law was to be had only by sheer good fortune. ‘If Krishna 
is gracious to me or the goddesses Lakshmi and Gauri are pleased towards my 
daughter, only then, and not otherwise, I shall deserve to have such Son-in-law. 
Be pleased to put forth your best endeavour by all means to settle this affair with 
the least possible delay. But there is one point which I feel ashamed to mention. I 
am poor. I am unable to afford any dowry. It is only my daughter whom I shall 
give away and five myrobalans as her dowry. This is my request to you. You are 
to obtain their assent to this.’ On hearing these words of Ballabha acharya, the 
Ghatak felt a deep joy at the success of his mission and, coming back to Sachi, 
delivered to her the happy news and asked her to fix an auspicious day for the 
ceremony. All friends of the family were filled with gladness on hearing the 
happy tidings and applied themselves assiduously to make every preparation for 
the due solemnization of the Nuptials of Sree Lakshmi and Sree Narayana. 

The preliminary (adhibas) ceremony was duly performed on an auspicious day, 
to the accompaniment of dance, song and a great variety of music. 

The Brahmanas recited the Veda on all sides. Nimai took His seat in the centre 
of the gathering. The friends and Brahmanas performed this ceremony of 
betrothal by making offerings of perfumes and garlands to the Lord. The 
Brahmanas were specially pleased, being treated to excellent perfumes, sandal- 
paste, betel and garlands. Ballabha acharya came over to the home of Sachi and, 
having duly performed the same rite, returned with a joyous heart to his 
residence. 

Rising early next morning the Lord bathed, gave away alms and honoured the 
Manes with due worship. There was n great jubilation of dance, song and music. 
On all sides there arose a mighty tumult, amidst shouts of ‘give and take.’ There 
was a multitudinous gathering of loyal matrons, well-wishers, friends 
Brahmanas and good people. Mother Sachi joyfully offered to the ladies, who 
were present, fried rice, plantain, vermilion, betel and oil. The gods and their 
consorts assuming human forms merrily assembled to witness the Marriage of 
the Lord. Ballabha acharya also performed the worship of the gods and departed 
ancestors in the customary manner. 



At the hour of twilight, in an auspicious moment, the Lord set out in marriage 
procession to the house of Ballabha Misra. No sooner did the Lord arrive at 
the residence of Misra, the minds of Misra and all his family were filled with 
a boundless joy. Misra with due respect and a glad heart helped his Son-in-law 
to the Bridegroom’s Seat. He then brought out his daughter Lakshmi, decked in 
all Her ornaments, to the Presence of the Lord. The people began to shout 
the Name of Hari. They lifted Lakshmi Devi from the ground and carried Her 
on their shoulders through the function of perambulating the Lord seven 
times. Then, after making Her obeisance to Him, Lakshmi stood before the Lord 
with the palms of Her hands joined in the attitude of supplication. Then the 
Two threw flowers at Each Other, and Both Lakshmi and Narayana were very 
much pleased. Lakshmi then placed a beautiful garland at the Feet of the Lord 
and, making obeisance, made the formal surrender of Herself. The crowd 
thereupon raised a paean of triumph on all sides, singing with many voices he 
Name of Hari so that no other sound could be heard. The holy rite of beholding 
Each Other’s Face was next performed in the same manner. Then the Lord 
was seated with Lakshmi on His Left Side. The Lord was in the first bloom of 
youth, surpassing the god of love in beauty, by Whose Side Lakshmi now took 
Her seat. The beauty and joy that manifested themselves in the house of Misra 
no one has power to describe. 

Thereafter Ballabha sat down to the function of giving away his Daughter. It 
seemed as if Bhismaka himself had re-appeared in this world. After robing 
the Body of the Lord with rich clothing, garlands and sandal-paste, the best 
of Brahmanas washed His Lotus Feet, by Whose adoration Brahma, his 
prime ancestor, had been enabled to create the world. He then bestowed his 
Daughter in Marriage in due form. The Brahmana was immersed in the sea of 
bliss. It was now the turn of the matrons who duly performed the customary rites 
of the family. 

The Lord passed the night in the house of Ballabha acharya. On the following 
day He set out for His own home in the company of Lakshmi. All the 
people rushed out to have a Sight of the Lord as He was taken home on the 
shoulders of men, in a dola, with Lakshmi seated by His Side. Lakshmi and 
Narayana were both richly decorated with perfumes, garlands, ornaments, 
crowns, sandal-paste and collyrium. All the people praised Them, as they caught 
a glimpse of the Divine Pair. The ladies were specially affected by the Sight. 
That fortunate Maiden must have long worshipped Hara and Gauri with Her 
heart’s best devotion. Could such Husband be obtained by a girl except 



through extraordinary good luck? Some said that the Bridegroom and Bride 
seemed to be Hara and Gauri themselves. Some said, They were Indra and 
Sachi, or Rati and Madana.’ Some said, They were Lakshmi and Narayana.’ A 
group of ladies declared them to be ‘ Seeta and Rama, shining with 
incomparable Beauty, seated together on the dola.’ Thus said all those ladies. 
They beheld Lakshmi and Narayana with an auspicious intent. In this manner the 
Lord returned Home at night-fall with the tumult of dance song and music. 

Then Sachi Devi accompanied by the Brahmana matrons, with great joy, led her 
Daughter-in-law into the house. She satisfied all the Brahmanas and the 
dancers and musicians by lavish gifts of money, clothing and sweet words. We 
have it on the authority of Thakur Brindavandas that those who listen to this 
holy narrative of the Lord’s Marriage are completely freed from the bondage of 
this world. 

As Sree Lakshmi Devi took Her place by the Side of the Lord, The Home of 
Sachi glowed with a transcendent radiance. Sachi noticed, always both 
inside and outside the house, a wonderful flaming brilliance which could 
not, however, be definitely located. ‘She sometimes saw a blazing tongue of fire 
by the side of her Son; but as she turned to see again, it had vanished. 

She experienced off and on the fragrance of the lotus flower. Her 
amazement reached its climax and made her thoughtful. Mother Sachi mused, ‘I 
understand the cause of it. Lakshmi abides in this Maiden. For this reason I 
perceive the Light and the Fragrance of the Lotus. There is now also no pinch of 
the poverty of the bygone days. Ever since this Lakshmi, my Daughter-in-law, 
came into the house, wealth in every form has been pouring in from all sides in a 
most unaccountable manner.’ Mother Sachi often spoke in this strain. The Lord 
still chose to remain unmanifest. No one can understand the Will of God or how 
He sports at any time. When God does not make Himself known even 
Lakshmi Herself cannot know. This is testified by all the Scriptures, by the 
Vedas and: the Puranas, that he alone can know the Supreme Lord whom He 
Himself favours. 

I have retained the actual words of Thakur Brindavandas in describing the 
Marriage of Sree Gaursundar with Sree Lakshmi Devi. The Activities of 
Sree Chaitanya are not like those of mortal men. They were manifested in this 
world for the purpose of healing the disease of mortality by Their contemplation. 


Most fallen souls, who are denizens of this world, like nothing better than 



marrying and giving in marriage. It may be supposed that the detailed 
narrative of the Marriage of Sree Chaitanya has been recorded by His devotee to 
serve as a model to be followed by the fallen jivas and as sanctioning the 
institution of marriage itself for ensuring spiritual progress. Such a conclusion 
would also be most acceptable to those who are disposed to find a religious 
sanction for carnality. 

But the associates of Sree Chaitanya have cautioned us in unmistakable terms 
against initiation of the conduct of Sree Chaitanya. The Marriage of 
Sree Chaitanya is not a carnal affair. It is not to be understood as the glorification 
of the mundane institution of marriage. If Sree Chaitanya is regarded as a 
mortal, His Marriage will naturally be considered as :an affair like that of man 
and woman of this world. Those who choose to think in this way are of course 
free to follow the dictate of their empiric judgment. Only the associates and 
true followers of Sree Chaitanya, who have recorded the true meaning of the 
Events of His Career for the benefit of humanity and who have acquired the 
eligibility to be heard, by fully acting up to their professions, require us to 
forget tenttively the stubborn insinuations of our worldly experience which is 
bound to fail utterly to give us the knowledge of the reality of which we stand in 
such urgent need. 

The details of the Marriage of Sree Gaursundar should be listened to from the 
lips of sadhus, i.e., of those who are wholly devoted to the exclusive service 
of Godhead. God is the sole Proprietor of our senses. When our senses 
are directed Godward, they lose their grossness engendered by their 
wrong employment on subjects of this world. If the spiritual instinct, 
corresponding to sexuality, could be directed towards Godhead, it would be 
realised as the spiritual impulse of love. So long as it deliberately courts its 
stultification by directing itself to non-God for support, it finds itself stranded on 
this unwholesome mundane plane. Lust is the perversion of love into a 
loathsome mundane entity due to Its adulterous and perverted application 
amounting to a suicidal crime against its own nature. In other words, when the 
faculty of amorous love is exercised by the soul, who is free from all mundane 
hankering towards the All-holy, it is love. Once this change of direction is 
really established, the substantive existence of the spiritual function 
corresponding to lust is realised on the automatic elimination of all mundane 
unwholesomeness. The spiritual function possesses perfectly wholesome nature 
and permanent substantive existence. The corresponding mundane function is 
devoid of both these essential characteristics. This is altogether inconceivable to 



the materialised mind. 


The perception of the associated correlatives of inferiority and superiority, 
grossness and wholesomeness, evil and good, smallness and greatness etc. is 
the inevitable concomitant of our gross sensuous experience. God reserves the 
right of appearing to any and every entity as He pleases. And as soon as He 
chooses to favour an entity by His acceptance of his service, he is instantly freed 
from all grossness by such acceptance. The marriage-rite of a Bengali Brahmana 
has nothing inherently spiritual in it. But it is nevertheless an Eternal Activity 
for God to accept these rites and all rites, and by such Acceptance they 
are necessarily freed from all grossness and imperfection. Those, who do not 
want to enter fully into this real meaning of the Activities of the Divinity when 
They become visible in this world, earn only damnation by their mis-reading of 
the Scriptures. 

The marriage-rite of a Bengali pseudo-Brahlnana is categorically different from 
that of Sree Chaitanya for the reasons suggested above. The former produces and 
aggravates the malady of carnality. Such a result cannot be avoided by merely 
choosing to imagine that the sensuous affair is sanctioned by the Divine; 

because the Divine Marriage is located wholly above the plane of the 
conditioned soul. The sight or contemplation of the Divine Event re-acts on 
the conditioned soul, if he does not oppose the process by the persistent abuse 
of his freedom of will in the matter of sexuality. The result of such re-action 
is spiritually beneficial. The nonspiritual, even in the case of the votary 
of intangible abstractions, can only re-act on the non-spiritual and complicate 
the non-spiritual condition. The actual Existence and redeeming Potency of 
the Divinity is unconsciously, but none the less decisively, denied by the 
idealist whose vision is completely deluded by the subtler potency of matter by 
reason of such attitude. Gaursundar is Godhead Himself. The contemplation of 
His Marriage-Rite, in its minutest details with an enlightened serving faith 
elicited by the instructions of the good preceptor, is bound to re-act on the 
fettered soul and free him from the bondage of carnality. 

We are servants of Krishna. We are not masters of anything. Sree Lakshmi Devi 
is the Eternal Consort of Sree Gaursundar and serves Him as Consort. 

Sree Gaursundar is the Lord of Sree Lakshmi Devi. The jiva cannot be the Lord 

of any entity. The marriage institution of this world establishes a 

mundane connection between two material bodies inside which two offending 



jivas are imprisoned. Having lost all consciousness of his real, i.e., spiritual 
nature, the bound jiva, supposing his physical body to be identical with himself, 
falls under the power of the physical senses and considers himself as an enjoyer 
of sensuous pleasure accruing from such reciprocation of bodily and 
mental activities. The sexual relationship in the flesh is the perverted caricature 
by material symbols of the state of intimate spiritual communion of the 
individual soul with God in his pure natural state. The institution of marriage is 
sinful if the jiva regards it as a means of his sensuous gratification, as such 
amorous activities necessarily tend to prolong the bondage of matter and 
consequent forgetfulness of Godhead. The bodily marriage is harmful and 
unnatural. In the conditioned state it may not be always possible to avoid the 
married state in a natural way. But it is always possible even for a married 
couple to honestly try to steer clear of carnality. They are enabled to do this if 
they learn the nature of the real connubial connection, which is possible only in 
the Supreme Lord, from the lips of sadhus. Being thus enlightened by the mercy 
of sadhus, one is enabled to realise the true meaning of Shastric provisions in 
regard to marriage that are intended to unite individual souls to God by the 
gradual but complete elimination of all carnal desire. Sometimes also a self- 
realised soul (sadhu) may adopt the married state in order to serve God by 
setting an example to fallen jivas embodying the shastric ideal of the married 
state. But nothing is gained by lifeless imitation of the external conduct of such a 
person. It is necessary first of all to seek for true enlightenment at the feet of the 
guileless and sincere servants of the Lord. To the understanding, enlightened by 
the causeless mercy of sadhus, the real significance of the sacrament of marriage 
discloses itself. Conditioned souls have no right of entry into the spiritual realm 
until and unless they are enabled to realise the necessity of submitting to the 
purgatorial process of the cleansing of all worldly dirt by the unconditional 
service of the true devotees of Godhead. 

The ladies of the neighbourhood gave vent to their opinion that the Bride and 
Bridegroom were no other than Lakshmi and Narayana; or, in other words, They 
were regarded as Godhead and His Eternal Consort. This was also 
fully applicable to the case. But we should be on our guard against the 
utterly profane carnal sentimentalism that proposes to regard every newly 
married pair as resembling Lakshmi and Narayana, or, for the matter of that, 
which proposes to regard any jiva as the husband or wife of another by his 
spiritual nature. The mundane relation of husband and wife is of the flesh, being 
the grossly perverted eternal relation that unites mediately the individual soul, in 
his state of grace, with the Fountain head of All-existence through his 



willing, unconditional submission to the guidance of the pleanary Power. It is 
sheer folly to confound the one with the other. 

Similarly those are also equally deluded who choose to regard the issue born of 
such bodily union as being on a level with Divine Gopala. Such people affect 
to be innocently unconscious of the eternal difference that separates this 
nether world, its concerns and the conditioned souls from the Divinity and His 
Own. The jiva commits a great offence against Godhead when he marries 
another jiva for the practice of carnality, and a sacrilege when he chooses to 
regard such bodily union as Divinely ordained. The soul of the jiva can be 
neither wife nor husband in the worldly sense. He has nothing to do with this 
world. The flesh and all its concerns are the snare which entraps the soul who is 
disinclined to serve Godhead and seeks, in lieu of the spiritual and absolutely 
pure service of the Lord, his own selfish enjoyment. So long as the desire for 
such enjoyment retains possession of the mind of the jiva, he is apt to turn a deaf 
ear to the Word of God always warning him from without and within against 
the seductions of the flesh. To such a person the world appears to be a place 
of legitimate sensuous enjoyment. When such a person also sets up as a 
preacher of the Word of God, he is bound to mis-interpret the Scriptures in order 
to make them tally with his own sensuous outlook and often carries this 
misinterpretation to such lengths that he feels no scruple in representing 
his sensual activities as being indentical with the service of God on the ground 
that they are also applauded by all other sinners. It is these pseudo-preachers 
who also declare the consummation of carnal marriage between one jiva . 
and another as identical with the institution sanctioned by the Scriptures. Let 
us beware of these pseudo-preachers who are infinitely worse than even 
the proverbial wolves in sheep’s clothing. One should on principle refuse to 
be instructed in the Word of God by a worldling who deceives himself and 
others by putting on the holy garb of a servant of God, and should avoid the 
society of such a person as that of an open enemy of Godhead. Toleration of 
such persons is the worst cruelty to oneself as well as to the person himself, 
being an offence at the Feet of the Lord and against the express teaching of all 
Scriptures. These hypocritical teachers of the religion are worse than even the 
rankest of atheists by profession. 



Chapter 10 Professor Life (Contd.) 


The figure of Sree Gaursundar as professor (adhyapaka) has been described in 
some detail by Thakur Brindavandas. He was constantly surrounded by a host of 
admiring pupils. He was extremely proud of His learning and took a particular 
pleasure in ridiculing and exposing the ignorance of everybody. He cared for 
nothing except His books. He had an extraordinarily Beautiful Appearance and 
was in the bloom of His Youth. Grace and Beauty marked His every Limb. His 
Hands reached down to the Knee. His wide Eyes resembled the petals of the 
lotus flower. His Lips were always tinged by betel. He wore the most handsome 
clothing. 

This beautiful, young, arrogant Scholar’s teaching was also unique in character. 
No savant of the then greatest centre of learning of India presumed to understand 
it really. The quondam teacher of Sree Gaursundar, fortunate Gangadas Pandit, 
was the only exception. The Lord opened out the store of His Learning freely to 
His old teacher. Worldly-minded people praised the Scholar and said that the 
parents of such a Son were the possessors of the richest of all treasures. To the 
woman-kind this insolent Scholar appeared in the likeness of the god of love 
himself. To the atheists He was terrible as Death. To the Pandits He was like a 
second Brihaspati by His wonderful learning. Different persons viewed Him in a 
different light in accordance with their particular standards of the highest worth. 

But there was one group of people who did not share this general admiration of 
the particularly well-dressed Teacher. This was the community of the 
Vaishnavas. They were utterly disappointed to find no trace of inclination for 
Krishna in this fascinating Youth Whose great learning, they knew well, would 
be of no avail to save Him from the clutches of ignorance and death. They did 
not hesitate to speak out to His Face, ‘Why dost Thou waste Thy time in the 
delusions of learning ?’ The Lord laughed as He listened to the words of His 
servants and replied, ‘I am fortunate in that you take the trouble to teach it to 
Me.’ 

There was at this time a considerable community of Vaishnavas resident in 
Nabadwip, as the place offered special facilities for study and the prospect 
of living close to the holy Ganges. Among them was a large body of devotees 
from Chattagram (Chittagong). In the afternoon the Vaishnavas assembled in 
the Academy of Sree Advaita Acharya. They met there regularly to discourse 



about Krishna. It was a gathering of persons, all of whom were from their birth 
without the least attachment for the things of this world. In fact they were not of 
this world at all. They had been born in different parts of the country and were 
brought together at Nabadwip by the Will of Godhead. 

Mukunda sang the kirtana of Hari to this assembly of the pure devotees. All the 
Vaishnavas were pleased with Mukunda whose song had the quality of 
melting their hearts. The joy of the assembled devotees, as Mukunda would 
begin to sing, became so intense that it expressed itself in strange ways. Some 
wept. Some laughed. Some began to dance. Some rolled on the ground, forgetful 
of their apparel. Some donned their cloth tightly and shouted challenge 
of defiance. Some ran up to Mukunda and clasped his feet. So wonderful 
indeed, was the effect on those Vaishnavas of the Kirtana of Krishna sang by 
Mukunda. His song produced the highest bliss and made the Vaishnavas forget 
all cause of grief. 

The Lord was specially pleased with Mukunda, in His heart, for this reason. He 
would tease Mukunda whenever He chanced to meet him, by asking him to solve 
logical riddles. This led to prolonged controversies. Mukunda was well-versed in 
the science of Logic and made use of every form of argument in holding his 
ground against the onslaughts of Sree Gaursundar. But he was always beaten in 
the long run. Nimai put these riddles also to Sribas Pandit and other devotees. 
They were very much afraid of His puzzles and always scattered at His 
Approach. The devotees had no taste for any discourse except 
regarding Krishna, and Nimai never proposed anything except riddles of dry 
logic. No one could solve His puzzles and He mercilessly exposed all who broke 
down. 

One day as the Lord was passing along the highway in the company of His 
pupils with every manifestation of the vanity of a pedantic scholar, 

Mukunda, who was going to the Ganges for his bath, saw the Lord from a 
distance and immediately took to his heels, Noticing this the Lord said to His 
servant Govinda, 'Why did the rascal bolt on seeing Me? 5 Govinda did not 
understand the reason of Mukunda’s conduct. He suggested that he might have 
had some business of his own. The Lord said that the real reason was his belief 
that a Vaishnava should never greet a person who is averse to Godhead. Then 
the Lord spoke in the hearing of all, 'Let him keep aloof for the present I will 
see how long he will avoid Me in this manner. I will become such a good 
Vaishnava that even Siva and Brahma will dance attendance at My doorsteps. 



Those very people, who now flee at My Approach, will then sing My praise/ He 
said this to His students laughingly as He was returning home in their company. 

It was, indeed, a most distressing period for the devotees of Nabadwip. The 
whole of Nadia was mad with the taste of riches and sons. The people 
launched into invectives as soon as they heard of kirtana. They, indeed, said 
openly that it was only a device for filling the belly. They were specially wroth 
against Sribas and his three brothers. 

The arguments they used against the Vaishnavas have been preserved by Thakur 
Brindavandas. 'Was there any justification in dancing in their saucy 
and unmannerly way, giving up the method of intellectual communion ?’ T 
myself have read the Bhagavata many times over, but I do not find in it any 
method of dancing and crying/ ‘I cannot get any sleep after dinner on account of 
Sribas and his brothers. Is it not pious enough if one calls upon Krishna with 
a subdued voice? Is there any unavoidable necessity of dancing, singing 
and shouting?’ This was the universal attitude of all non-Vaishnavas. They 
talked and jeered in this manner whenever they met the Vaishnavas. 

When the devotees used to feel very much depressed at such treatment by the 
people, Sree Advaita Acharya would repeat His assurance that He would 
destroy all those atheists, as Sree Krishna would be with them in a very short 
time in the town of Nabadwip itself. The words of Advaita dispelled all their 
sorrows and the Vaishnavas kept up the blessed Kirtana of Krishna with the 
greatest joy. Such was the state of affairs at Nabadwip when Lord Vishwambhar 
was deeply occupied with His secular studies. 

So the Lord Himself, the Teacher of the whole world, by His Conduct as well as 
Instruction, was apparently pursuing a mode of life which was indistinguishable 
from that of the average worldly people. Would we be justified in blaming the 
pseudo-teachers of the Vaishnava religion of these days who, professing to 
follow the example of Sree Gaursundar, lead a life of luxurious ease with their 
wives and children ? If Sree Gaursundar chewed betel should they not also do 
the same as in duty bound? If Professor Nimai dressed faultlessly, poked fun at 
the Vaishnavas and devoted Himself exclusively to secular studies, why should 
such innocent amenities of a householder’s life be forbidden to His followers? 


The questions no doubt suggest their own answer. In the case of Sree Gaursundar 
all this was absolutely proper. To the true devotee of Godhead every thing is 



handy and fit, as he knows their use for the service of Godhead. The eternal 
conduct of the devotee derives its value for worldly observers from this internal 
quality. If a woman is really chaste, she can do nothing that is improper. If she is 
really unchaste, she can do nothing that is proper, not even by mimicking the 
external conduct of any chaste lady. Such mimicry is in no way different from 
unchastity and is often the more dangerous form of wickedness. A thing can be 
but itself. External conduct is always deceptive, being external. By imitating the 
external Conduct of Sree Gaursundar that was visible to mundane observers at 
any period of His Activities, nothing but the direst offense is reaped. The 
Relation of the Lord to His Consort, to His pupils, to His devotees is 
misunderstood if we choose to misunderstand them by refusing to listen to those 
who are acquainted with the real Nature of Nimai. Even the Vaishnavas 
confessed, when they came to know Him later as He really is, that they also had 
once utterly misunderstood Him and His Activities, before He Himself 
manifested the real nature of them in their more explicit form to their higher 
consciousness. 

The full view regarding the activities of Sree Gaursundar is attainable only if 
they are regarded as the Pastimes of Godhead Himself. Sree Gaursundar 
is identical with Sree Krishna. Those, who ignore this by misunderstanding 
His Role as Devotee, necessarily fail to obtain the adequate view of His Doings. 
The want of this knowledge apparently led even the Vaishnavas themselves 
to deprecations of the external conduct of Sree Gaursundar at this period. 

They wished that He should become a devotee like themselves. This is the 
Natural desire of all pure Vaishnavas in regard to non-Vaishnavas. The pursuit 
of secular studies in which Sree Gaursundar was wholly absorbed and 
the employment of His controversial powers on subjects other than Krishna 
were, therefore, condemned by those pure devotees as the abuse of His 
intellectual powers. It is instructive to find that those Vaishnavas were not under 
the delusion, which is so much cherished by the pseudo-Vaishnavas of these 
days, that the Conduct of Nimai was that of the model servant of Godhead. 

They were right so far. They apparently erred in supposing that Sree Gaursundar 
was a Vaishnava and not Vishnu Himself. But subsequently also, when they 
knew the Lord by His grace, they did not, therefore, try to imitate the Conduct of 
Sree Gaursundar. 

Secular studies and pursuits in their purely worldly sense are not only 
unnecessary but are positively harmful to the jiva in the state of bondage. 

The object and method of all non-spiritual activities is to be enabled thereby 



to acquire extended opportunities of selfish, material enjoyment, a 
desideratum which is foreign to the nature of the jiva in the State of Grace. Any 
act which is undertaken for securing one’s own enjoyment ceases to have any 
reference to the service of the Lord Who is the Absolute Master, Proprietor and 
of everything. The pursuit of the knowledge of the things of this world 
with reference to ourselves as enjoyers of them is not the function of the pure 
soul. By all knowledge Godhead alone is properly served. The pursuit of 
secular knowledge is productive of spiritual well-being if it possesses this 
exclusive reference to Godhead both as regards its object and method. 

The acceptance of this true principle does not destroy any value, it only removes 
our ignorance and fulfills the only real object of all knowledge. God certainly 
indwells all knowledge, but inaccessibly to the conditioned soul. As soon as the 
conditioned soul is enabled to realize His Presence in all learning, his object and 
method of pursuing knowledge ceases to be secular and harmful. Sree 
Gaursundar was within His Rights in accepting the service of the goddesses of 
secular learning and of physical Nature, because He is their Lord and Proprietor. 
There could be no absence of Reference in the Reference Himself. But because 
Sree Gaursundar was pleased to exhibit the Leela of pursuing secular knowledge 
for its own sake, those who are aware of His Divinity should not, with an 
inexcusable perversity of judgment, jump to the conclusion that His Conduct 
was intended to justify the apparently similar procedure of any jivas, if they 
happen to cherish the unnatural desire of becoming the masters or slaves of 
Material Nature. God is always the Master even when He chooses to manifest 
His Divine Form in this unspiritual world. Even when the Lord seems, to the 
perverted judgment of fallen jivas, to be subject, like themselves, to the laws of 
physical Nature, He remains her Master none the less. 

Even the devotees themselves failed to understand the Doings of the Lord at this 
period, although His conduct was appreciated by worldly people who supposed, 
in their disloyal delusion, that it resembled their own. This latter kind of 
appreciation was an unconscious offense against the Lord, while the depreciation 
of His Conduct by the devotees was not an offense, although it was an error, into 
which they fell by the Will of Godhead Himself, for the furtherance of His 
Pastimes. 

Worldly people misunderstood the Conduct of both Sree Gaursundar and His 
devotees. They admired Sree Gaursundar for His great Qualities, for the 
Beauty of His Person and for His great Learning. They desired those things 



for themselves and could, therefore, appreciate them by the method of envy. 

The bound jiva wants to enjoy, to rule, to possess beauty and learning for 
increasing his supposed power and scope of selfish enjoyment. Sree Gaursundar 
had all what they so wrongly desire. The worldly people regarded Him as the 
most successful of worldlings. They disliked the devotees, because they did 
not approve of their lack of worldliness. The mode of life of the devotees 
seemed in the eyes of those worldly people to be not merely bad, but ridiculous. 
It is not possible for worldly people to understand the ways of pure devotees ; it 
is still less possible for them to understand the Ways of God Himself. 

If we want to follow Sree Gaursundar we should in the first place have to know 
our real relationship to Him. In proportion as this knowledge of our relationship 
with Godhead is realized, we are in a position to understand His Ways. When 
Sree Gaursundar took to secular study, apparently for its own sake, His Purpose 
was to be merciful to the goddess of secular learning inside whose heart He ever 
dwells in the Form that is incomprehensible to the conditioned jiva; and, 
secondarily, to establish the principle, for the benefit of the fallen jivas, that they 
should neither thoughtlessly imitate nor condemn the conduct of the pure 
devotee, nor suppose that he is ever liable to error by reason of his youth, or 
apparent ignorance of the concerns of this world, or even apparent devotion to 
them. The efforts of the servants of God are not governed by the instinct of so- 
called self-preservation, or for adjustment to the phenomenal environment, 
which is apt to dominance the activities of fallen jivas. The devotees never do 
anything except under the pure impulse of serving Krishna. It is not altogether 
impossible for us, even while we continue in the sinful state, to admit this. 

Regarding Sree Mukunda Datta, we have the hint in Sree Chaitanya Charitamrita 
that ‘Lord Chaitanya Himself dances in the kirtana of Mukunda. 5 Mukunda 
made his appearance in Chittagong. In Gauraganoddesadipika he is identified 
with Madhukantha, the singer of Braja. We have seen already that Mukunda 
Datta was a fellow student of Sree Chaitanya in the Academy of Sree Gangadas 
Pandit. Mukunda was a most brilliant scholar and Chaitanya found great delight: 
in putting to him the most difficult riddles of Logic. Mukunda read the 
Bhagavatam to Sree Chaitanya after the Latter’s return from Gaya. When Sree 
Chaitanya danced in the yard of Sribas Pandit, Mukunda sang the kirtana. He 
accompanied Sree Chaitanya to Katwa on the occasion of His Acceptance of 
Renunciation (sannyas), and subsequently followed Him to Puri. He used to 
come every year to Puri from Bengal to visit the Lord, in the company of His 
other devotees. 



The godless people of that time objected to the kirtana on the ground that 
dancing and singing with a loud voice are not the method of 
worship recommended by the Bhagavatam. This is true in regard to the 
insincere performances of the pseudo Vaishnavas. But the Bhagavatam 
frequently mentions the manifestation of genuine spiritual perturbations in the 
forms of laughter, weeping, dancing, singing, etc., in an unaccountable form in 
the true devotees of Krishna. The people were angered by the loud kirtana of 
Sribas and his brothers for the ostensible reason that it stood in the way of their 
sleep, etc. 

Those, who profess to be seekers of worldly merit (punya) for its enjoyable 
rewards, naturally misunderstand the efforts of pure devotees who 
practice devotion to Godhead, for benefiting all persons by inclining them to the 
service of Godhead which is obstructed by their hankerings after worldly 
enjoyment. But those godless people supposed, in their ignorance, that the 
dancing and singing of the Vaishnavas, which are performed because they are 
pleasing to Krishna, are a crude and inferior form of worship of which the 
lonely individualistic method was regarded as the highest. .This insolence 
of judgment, which is the necessary and invariable concomitant of simulation 
of worship by conditioned souls, proved its own terrible punishment 
and effectively prevented those scoffers from listening to the unalloyed kirtana 
of Hari that was nightly performed within the reach of their hearing, for 
the benefit of all, by Sribas Pandit and his brothers, in the teeth of the 
violent, uncalled-for, suicidal opposition of all those self-complaisant worldly 
egotists. 

While Nimai was thus wholly immersed in the pleasures of study, Sree Isvara 
Puri came to Nabadwip and presented himself at the house of Advaita. He 
was clad in the garb of an ascetic (sannyasin) of one staff; and so no one 
suspected him to be a Vaishnava. But Advaita noticed the glow of his 
extraordinary spiritual energy and recognized him as a theistic (Vaishnava) 
sannyasin. No sooner did Mukunda begin a song about Krishna in the gathering 
of the Vaishnavas at Advaita’s, the ocean of natural love for Krishna in the pure 
heart of Puri was deeply stirred. Presently all the Vaishnavas came to learn that 
the sannyasin, who loved Krishna so deeply, was no other than Sree Isvara Puri, 
the loved disciple of Sree Madhabendra Puri. 


One day as Sree Gaursundar was returning home after teaching, He accidentally 
met Sree Iswara Puri on His way and did obeisance to him, as is the duty 



of every householder towards a sannyasin. Sree Isvara Puri was struck by 
the wonderfully beautiful appearance of Sree Gauranga and enquired Who He 
was and what subject He taught. Nimai with due deference answered the 
questions of Sree Isvara Puri, and, with great respect and cordiality, invited him 
to accompany. Him to His House and accept the alms of his day’s meal there. 

Sachi Devi cooked the offering for Krishna and gave it in alms to Sree Isvara 
Puri. After the meal Sree Isvara Puri engaged with Nimai Pandit in 
discourse regarding Krishna and in course of the talk manifested his 
overwhelming love for Krishna. Sree Isvara Puri spent several months at 
Nabadwip at the house of Sree Gopinath acharya, sister’s husband (the famous 
Sarbabhauma Bhattacharchaya of Vidyanagar). Nimai Pandit went to Vidyanagar 
in the evenings to pay His respects to Sree Isvara Puri at the conclusion of His 
day’s teaching. Sree Isvara Puri was charmed with the love for Krishna of 
Sree Gadadhar Pandit who was spontaneously unattached to the world from 
infancy. Moved by feeling of affection Sree Iswara Puri undertook to read to 
Gadadhar his own work, ‘Sree Krishnaleelamritam’. 

One day Sree Isvara Puri asked Nimai Pandit to correct any, mistakes that He 
might detect in his book, promising to adopt any alterations that He 
might suggest. The Lord replied, ‘that as the book contained the account of 
the Doings of Krishna and had been written by a pure devotee like Sree Isvara 
Puri, any person, who presumed to detect any fault in it, would certainly commit 
a grave offense against Godhead. Whatever the external quality of the verses of 
a devotee might seem to be, Krishna is fully pleased thereby. There was no 
doubt about it. Any grammatical or other defects that may happen to be present 
in the language of the devotee are over-looked by Krishna Who is ever subdued 
by the homage of the heart and accepts nothing but pure love for Himself. If any 
one found fault with the language of a devotee, it only proved that the critic 
was devoid of the Grace of Krishna. There did not exist the person who would 
dare to find fault with the language used by a pure devotee like Puripada to 
convey the tidings of Krishna.’ 

But Sree Isvara Puri continued to press his request that Nimai Pandit might point 
out the defects of his book. In this manner Isvara Puri spent hours in discussing 
daily a variety of topics with Nimai. One day after listening to a certain shloka, 
composed by Sree Isvara Puri, Nimai Pandit said to him, by way of fun, that the 
verb in the said verse should have the form of parasmaipada and not of 
atmanepada. Thereafter, when Nimai Pandit next made His Appearance another 



day, Sree Isvara Puri told Him that he had been able to find out the grammatical 
authority in favour of his conjugation of the verb as atmanepada. The Lord also, 
in order to enhance the greatness of His devotee, refrained from finding fault 
with this conclusion. Having passed some time in the pleasures of these learned 
pastimes in the company of Nimai, Sree Isvara Puri started again on his 
wanderings in order to sanctify the tirthas, all over India, by his visit. 

The above account of Sree Chaitanya’s first meeting with His Guru is 
reproduced verbatim from Sree Chaitanya Bhagavata. Sree Isvara Puri made 
his appearance in a Brahmana family of Kumarhatta ( Halishahar, on the E. B. 
Ry.) 

He was the most beloved disciple of Sree Madhabendra Puri. In Chaitanya- 
Charitamrita it is narrated (Antya, VIII, 26-29) how Sree Isvara Puri obtained 
the mercy of his Gurudeva, by his loyal service, who bestowed on his 
worthy disciple his own love for Krishna. The unique love of Sree Isvara Puri 
for Krishna, which was aroused in him in this manner, never left him. 

Sree Isvara Puri wore the garb of a sannyasin of one staff (the staff being the 
symbol of self-discipline). The assumption of the single staff is the practice 
of those sarmyasins who follow the path of knowledge to obtain the reward of 
the six-fold endeavours, viz., sama (equanimity), dama (self-control), 
tidksha (endurance), etc., by the study of the Vedanta and the other Scriptures. 
Those who follow the path offruitive works, on attainment of the stage ofyati, 
take to the triple-staff sannyas and wander about companionless in all directions. 
The Vaishnava Sannyasins, discarding alike the desire for worldly enjoyment as 
well as renunciation of such enjoyment, engage in the exclusive service of Hari. 
In them, therefore, the twin renunciation of worldly enjoyment and 
renunciation of such renunciation, are simultaneously present. Their position is 
thus defined in Srimad Bhagavatam, ‘I shall cross the otherwise impassable 
ocean of ignorance by serving the Feet of Godhead by practicing devotion to 
the Supreme Soul in the footsteps of the great sages (rishis) of old’. 

The rasa (i.e. mellowing quality) of devotion to Krishna, in which Sree Isvara 
Puri was established by the mercy of Sree Madhabendra, transcends all 
other rasas (mellownesses) by its supreme excellence and complete perfection. 
The transcendental rasas may have the forms of (1) Brahman bliss, i.e., the 
bliss of realizing the transcendent greatness of Godhead, (2) the bliss of 
serving Godhead as a Person Who is Supreme Ruler of the material and 



spiritual worlds, and (3) the highest bliss of serving Godhead as Recipient of 
causeless loving devotion. The Object of worship, pointed to by the above three 
methods of spiritual service, has been called in the Scriptures the Brahman, 

Sree Narayana and Sree Krishna respectively. All these rasas (mellownesses) 
are located beyond the zone of operation of the triple qualities that permeate 
this material world which find their way even to Kailasa, the abode of Siva. 

The worthlessness of the worldly rasas (tasty liquid) is due to the existence of 
plurality of the objects of worship. In the spiritual realm, in Vishnu Who is Full, 
Indivisible, Pure Cognition, there is no possibility of such defects. In Krishna 
this spiritual service attains its highest fulfillment. Sree Isvara Puri was loved by 
Krishna for his attachment to Sree Guru the best-beloved of Krishna. The author 
of Sree Chaitanya Bhagavata says, ‘that being most dearly loved by Krishna 
Sree Isvara Puri was necessarily kind to all jivas without distinction. Such 
universal kindness is never possible in those who do not serve Krishna. 5 

The unwillingness of Sree Gaursundar to comply with the express request of 
Sree Isvara Puri to correct the defects of his book is not a display of 
insincere civility (which passes in the name of humility in this world). Krishna 
makes no difference between the highly skilled linguist and one who is ignorant 
of the alphabet. Krishna is ever more kind to him who possesses the 
greater inclination of service. Krishna, Who knows the inmost thoughts of our 
hearts, is never guilty of mistaken partiality. Pedantic scholars devoid of love 
for Krishna only prove their own real ignorance by trying to find defect in 
the language of devotees. The ignorance of such scholars is exposed at every 
step by the mercy of the Lord of the goddess of learning in order to wean them 
from their suicidal hostility to the devotees of Krishna. This also serves to keep 
their scholars, pride low. All such vanity is the outcome of ignorance of Krishna 

Who is the Truth Absolute. All sinfulness and unwholesomeness is due to 
ignorance of the Real Truth, in an aggravated form under the guise of 
pseudoscholarship. 

As Professor the Lord was wholly occupied with His studies, teaching and 
learned disputations. It was specially His practice to test the knowledge of all the 
teachers without exception. No Professor of Nabadwip ever came victoriously 
through his searching tests. No one was ever able to give a satisfactory answer to 
the questions put by Him. Although Nimai Pandit taught only Vyakarana, which 
is a comparatively elementary subject. He showed very little deference to the 



most erudite Professors of that celebrated emporium of learning. He often passed 
with a triumphant bearing through all quarters of the town in the company of His 
students displaying the aggressive nonchalance of the perfectly self-conceited 
scholiast. 

One day, as Nimai Pandit was thus parading the town with His students, He met 
Mukunda on His way, quite by accident. The Lord took him by the hand and said 
‘Why do you bolt at the very sight of Me? I won’t allow you to escape this time 
without being enlightened by you.’ Mukunda thought within himself I must beat 
Him to-day. His special and only forte is Vyakarana. I shall silence Him by 
asking questions about Rhetoric that He may never again dare to be insolent to 
me’. Accordingly Mukunda began by deprecating Vyakarana as the Shastra fit 
only for children. ‘Let us discourse instead about Rhetoric ’. The Lord said 
Mukunda might select any subject he liked. Mukunda thereupon began to quote 
the most difficult passages from the whole range of poetical literature and asked 
Him to explain their rhetorical qualities. 

Sree Gaursundar impeached every metaphor and simile and all the rhetorical 
figures that were employed by those poets, and laid bare their defects in 
their minutest details. Mukunda was unable to justify his own select pieces 
against the penetrating criticisms of the Lord. The Lord then said laughingly, 

‘Go home to-day. Look up your books with more care. I shall again examine you 
tomorrow. You should come early.’ Mukunda took the dust of the Feet of 
the Lord and departed. He was amazed and began to reflect, Is such 
learning possible in a mortal ? There is no Shastra of which He is not perfect 
Master. 

Gifted with such extraordinary genius, had He been only a devotee of Krishna, I 
would never leave His company even for the space of the fraction of a moment 
!’ 


Another day in course of His peripatetic wanderings the Lord of Vaikuntha fell 
in with Gadadhar. The Lord laughingly caught him by both hands and would not 
quit His hold of him. ‘You study Nyaya. Tell me something about it’. Gadadhar 
replied, ‘Ask any question’. The Lord said, ‘Tell Me the characteristics of 
liberation (mukti)\ Gadadhar explained it in accordance with the Nyaya Shastra. 
The Lord said that the subject was not really explained. The position which 
Gadadhar took up was that of the Nyaya Shastra according to which liberation 
(mukti) ensues on the cessation or destruction of the extreme miseries.’ The Lord 



of the goddess of learning found fault with the proposition in many ways. There 
is no disputant who can hold his ground against Godhead. As a matter of fact, 
there was not a single person in the whole of Nabadwip who could come up to 
the level of Nimai Pandit in learned disputations. Gadadhar now thought of 
saving his face by flight. The Lord said ‘Gadadhar go home today. I have more 
to learn from you. So do not fail to turn up early to-morrow 5 . Gadadhar made his 
obeisance and went off. 

The Lord roamed through every part of the town in this manner. He was soon 
recognized by all persons as a most profound scholar. All people showed 
Him the highest respect whenever they chanced to meet Him. In the afternoon 
the Lord proceeded to the side of the Ganges with all His students and sat on 
the bank with demonstrative joy. The Beauty of the Person of the Lord, Who 
is served by Sree Lakshmi Devi Herself, is unique in all the three worlds 
and inspired love in every beholder. The Son of Sachi sat there in the midst of 
His disciples and expounded the Shastras. The Vaishnavas also gathered to the 
side of the Ganges in the evening and from a distance listened to the 
learned dissertations of the Lord. They experienced a mixed feeling of delight 
and sorrow as they thought within themselves that Nimai Pandit was, 
indeed, Possessor of Learning and Beauty in an extraordinary measure. ‘But if 
Krishna is not served thereby those qualifications are of no use whatever 5 . They 
also confided to one another the fact that they were in the habit of fleeing the 
very sight of Him for fear of His puzzling hoaxes. Some complained that He also 
did not allow them to escape so easily, often holding them up with the 
peremptory authority of a customs-officer. A few admitted that the Brahmana 
was possessed of superhuman powers and even suspected that it is a great 
personage (mahapurusha) who had appeared in the world as Nimai Pandit. 

Although the Lord was constantly occupied in putting His puzzles to them, still 
the Sight of Him somehow always made those Vaishnavas feel very happy. 

They all realized that such learning was not to be found in man. But this 
discovery also added to their poignant grief that He did not serve Krishna. They 
implored one another to bless Him that He might thereby attain to love for 
Krishna. All the Vaishnavas would prostrate themselves to the Supreme Lord on 
the bank of the Ganges and all of them blessed Him, ‘May it be Thy pleasure, O 
Krishna, that the Son of Jagannath be maddened by love for Thee, giving up 
every other pleasure. May He constantly serve Thee with loving devotion. 
Vouchsafe to us, O Krishna, Him as our companion. 5 The Lord, who knows the 
inmost thoughts of the heart, was aware of these wishes of the Vaishnavas. He 



made obeisance to them whenever He chanced to meet Sribas and any of the 
devotees. The Lord received the blessings of the devotees with His Head bent in 
submission. 'By the blessings of the Divinity’, say the Scriptures, 'love for 
Krishna is aroused’. 

Some of them spoke to Him plainly, ‘Why do You waste Your time in the 
delusions of learning?, Some said 'Look here, Nimai Pandit; what does it 
profit to be learned? Make haste to serve Krishna. Why do people read—It is 
surely for the purpose of learning devotion to Krishna? If that is missed what is 
the good of learning?’ The Lord smiled and answered, ‘It is a great good fortune 
for Me that such as you teach Me to regard devotion to Krishna as essential. 

It seems to My mind that One, Whose welfare is sought by such as you, 
is, indeed, most fortunate. I have a mind, after teaching My pupils for a little 
time longer to betake Myself to good Vaishnavas’. Thus saying the Lord, Who 
found Himself in the midst of His servants, would begin to laugh. No one 
could recognize Him by the force of His Own Power. By such ways did the 
Lord captivate the minds of all persons. There was no one who did not long for 
the Sight of Him. 

The Lord’s leisure was spent in these learned sessions by the side of the Ganges 
and wanderings through the different quarters of the town. The citizens 
greeted the Feet of the Lord with the greatest affection no sooner they caught 
Sight of Him. The ladies said, ‘He is the god of love manifest. May woman be 
blessed by obtaining this Treasure at her every successive birth ! ’ The learned 
regarded Him as the equal of the celestial sage Brihaspati; and the oldest of them 
made their obeisance to His Lotus Feet. To the yogis, He appeared to possess 
the realized body. The wicked viewed Him with terror, as the very Form of 
Death. If the Lord greeted a person only once he was thereby reduced to the 
condition of His prisoner and wore round his neck the collar of His love. Despite 
all the outspoken boastings of learning in which the Lord constantly indulged in 
the hearing of everybody, He was devotedly loved by all the people. Even 
the Yavanas displayed a great liking for the Lord Who is by nature 
mercifully disposed to all without exception. 

The Lord held His Academy in the suite of rooms that led into the residence of 
the fortunate Mukunda-Sanjaya. The Son of Sree Sachi Devi engaged there 
in defending and opposing different interpretations and in refuting, justifying 
and expounding in endless ways, the texts of the sutras. The fortunate Sanjaya- 
Mukunda with all his family and dependents felt themselves borne aloft on 



the high tide of a perennial joy, the cause of which they could not understand. 


After the day’s triumphs of learning the Lord returned home in the evening. Thus 
did the Ruler of Vaikuntha choose to divert Himself with the exquisite pastimes 
of learning. 

These accounts from the pen of Thakur Brindavandas leave on the mind a most 
vivid impression of the realities of the Professor life of Sree Chaitanya. He 
was evidently the universal Favourite of both Hindus and Mussalmans alike 
and was feared by all the impious scholars and evil-doers of every description. 

He was to all appearance the ideal Householder Teacher absorbed in His 
studies and teaching, which were of a wholly secular character. He was also a 
most formidable controversialist and had a wonderful faculty of detecting 
and exposing weak points in the views of the leading scholars of the 
famous University-town. The Beauty of His Person ravished every beholder. He 
showed the highest respect to the community of the Vaishnavas although 
they happened to be the objects of persecution and ridicule by all classes of 
the people. But He showed very little disposition to listen to their 
discourses regarding Krishna. On the contrary, His genuine reverence for them 
did not prevent Him from putting even to them His puzzling riddles of Logic, 
the activity that He seemed to like best of all. So the Vaishnavas, although they 
had a genuine liking for Him, were grieved by His engrossing devotion to 
trivial secular studies and apparently utter indifference to Krishna. But 
they nevertheless prayed to Krishna to bestow on Him the fullest measure of 
love for Him that He might be a real Companion to them. 



Chapter 11 Unrecognised Direct Manifestation 


From the point that we reached in the previous Chapter begin, with a staggering 
suddenness, the overwhelming series of direct Manifestations which are also at 
first necessarily unrecognized. The beginning of this change is thus described by 
Thakur Sree Brindavandas. On a certain day the Lord under pretense of nervous 
break-down manifested all the perturbations of loving devotion. All on a sudden 
he began to utter words that are not of this world, rolled on the ground, laughed 
and smashed the house. He spoke with a deep, loud voice, girded up His loins 
and beat all persons whom He chanced to find about Him. His whole Body 
repeatedly attained the state of suspended animation and these fits of 
exclusiveness were so peculiar that they filled all beholders with terror. The 
friends came soon to learn the tidings of His supposed indisposition and turned 
up in a body. They busied themselves with devising the proper treatment of His 
mental derangement for so it appeared to them to be. Buddhimanta Khan and 
Mukunda-Sanjaya came to the House of the Lord with all members of their 
families. They applied to His Head medicinal oils, technically known as Vishnu 
and Narayana oils. Everyone offered the kind of help that suggested itself to him. 
But the Lord does everything by His own uncontrolled Will. How could He be 
cured by any external aid? 

The Lord shivered in every Limb and gesticulated violently. His loud 
exclamations terrified everybody. The Lord said: T am the Lord of all the 
worlds; I uphold the world, whence My name is Vishwambhar. I am He, but no 
one knows Me? With these words He begins to run at all the people to get hold 
of them. In this manner The Lord did disclose His own Lordly Nature under 
the guise of nervous malady. Yet no one understood, being prevented by 
His Power. Some held that He was possessed by a demon. Others opined that it 
was the doing of witches. Some expressed the view that it was undoubtedly a 
case of madness as He manifested the symptom of talking incessantly. By 
these indications they failed to understand His real Nature, being thus deluded 
by the Power of the Lord. They applied various curative oils to His Head and 
kept His Body immersed in oil in a large vat. The Lord laughed without restraint 
as He lay afloat in oil, which gave all persons the impression that He had a 
very serious attack of the worst type of the disease. 

Having by His Will sported for a while in this manner, the Lord regained His 
normal health by giving up the show of nervous malady. At this sudden recovery 



all people rent the sky with loud acclamations of the Name of Hari. In their joy, 
they made lavish gifts of clothing in such huge quantities that it baffles all 
calculation. All the people were gladdened by the tidings of the Lord’s recovery. 
All said, ‘May the great Pandit live for ever!’ ‘The Lord of Vaikuntha,’ observes 
Thakur Brindavandas, ‘made merry in this manner. Who has power to know Him 
if He does not make Himself known?’ 

These manifestations of spiritual perturbations described by Thakur 
Brindavandas in the above passage, are liable to be misunderstood. They 
were manifested by Sree Gaursundar under the form of the symptoms of 
nervous malady. Those who want to understand everything in terms of 
ordinary mundane experience and are not prepared to admit the existence, or 
possibility of existence, of the super-mundane, naturally reject the clear 
testimony of the Vaishnava writers to the effect that the spiritual perturbations 
are not physical phenomena at all even though they necessarily appear as such to 
the clouded vision and understanding of all mortals. 

The principle has already been discussed elsewhere. It applies to the whole range 
of spiritual manifestations. The Name Krishna, the Remains of the food tasted by 
Krishna, the Objects used in the worship of Krishna—such as buildings, utensils, 
etc., the body and mind of the person who worships Krishna, are, every one of 
them, spiritual entities, the consensus of opinion of all empiricists to the contrary 
notwithstanding. It is a difference of view which separates those, who admit the 
existence of the eternal and unbridgeable gulf that divides the spiritual from the 
material, from those who consciously or unconsciously, hold that the two are 
identical. The latter form the large and influential body of the anti- 
transcendentalists and philanthrophists. 

But the real transcendentalists possess an intelligible and consistent theistic 
philosophy. They believe in the actual substantive existence of the 
super mundane plane which never submits to the inspection of the material 
senses. The spiritual manifestations belong to the transcendental plane. They 
have to be carefully distinguished on the one hand from all worldly phenomena 
and on the other from dishonest or misguided exhibitions of the pseudo- 
transcendentalist. Everyone is free to believe or not believe a thing or 
a proposition. But no clear thinker would claim the right of misrepresenting, 
or deliberately misunderstanding, a proposition or an occurrence. The 
materialists and pseudo transcendentalists have deliberately misunderstood and 
mis-stated the accounts of the Spiritual Scriptures. This is not honest blunder. 



It was this possibility, nay the certainty of deliberate misunderstanding on the 
part of all disbelievers and pseudo-believers, that led Sree Gaursundar to 
devise this method, for saving them from the offense of blasphemy, of disguising 
the satvika manifestations of spiritual love under the form of the symptoms of 
a disease with which they have the closest external similarity. The opinion 
of those, who hold the view that the so-called satvika manifestations are 
also themselves due to the diseased condition of the brain, does not carry any 
more weight than deliberate misrepresentations. No physician can understand 
the real cause of the appearance or cessation of the phenomenon known as 
disease. But it is unfortunately only a small number of doctors who suspect and 
allow for this great insufficiency of the grounds of their knowledge in opining 
about bodily manifestations of any kind. Medical science is no less subject to 
the fundamental limitations of sensuous empiricism than its sister sciences. 

No science in the modern sense of the term would deserve a serious hearing 
unless it either helped the codification or widening of our stock of worldly 
experience. 

Considered from this point of view the science of medicine has no jurisdiction 
over spiritual manifestations, and this ought to be more clearly recognized acted 
upon and proclaimed by the leading scientists of to-day than they are always 
accustomed to do. They are, of course, free to criticize the methods 
and experiences of the Absolutists. It is only when they are really unable 
to understand spiritual matters after proper endeavor that such criticism has 
its real use in exposing the vagaries or opposition of insincere persons and 
thereby preventing mischief from that quarter. But let them not forget their 
legitimate function by themselves setting up as spiritualists and attempting in 
that unscientific manner to manufacture theories of the Absolute on the basis of 
any worldly stuff and thereby prove one more nuisance and obstruction in the 
way of the honest inquiry of the Transcendental. Those who willfully offend 
against reason are rightly punished by the perpetuation of their ignorance, for 
which they have to thank only themselves. The satvika perturbations due to love 
for Krishna, are objects of longing to devotees of the very highest order who 
are absolutely free from all ignorance and all taint of self-seeking. This 
is necessarily unintelligible to those who have not thought it worth their while 
to cross the threshold of spiritual life. Their self-sufficient attitude towards 
the problems of the eternal duties, is only a proof of their utter slavery to 
the illusory power of Vishnu, the goddess Maya, who is ever usefully engaged 
in deluding the race of the hypocrites of all shades. 



The utterances and activities of the servants of Vishnu are a perpetual enigma to 
the shrewdest atheists. No efforts of their perverted intellect can find out their 
real significance. The words uttered by the Vaishnava are transcendental, as are 
all activities. They are perfectly incomprehensible to conceited sinners who have 
been assigned this material world as the place of their abode as the expidatory? 
punishment of such perversity. The deluding power of Vishnu is ever engaged in 
guarding the portals of the transcendental realm against the impious assaults of 
all builders of the Babel. The realisation of this truth alone enables us to attain 
that perfect humility of the spirit to which the gates of the eternal realm of 
Vishnu are ever likely to open of themselves. The humility that is current in this 
world is the perverted reflection of the substantive spiritual quality and is all the 
more heinous because such disguised form of self-conceit constitutes the 
deliberate misrepresentation of true humility. External roughness or smoothness 
of conduct is no criterion of the real humility. The really humble conduct of the 
self-less devotee of Vishnu may seem as rudeness, conceit and even arrogance to 
the pretended view of the deliberate hypocrite. There is no help for a person who 
chooses to willfully misunderstand. Such persons have been aptly compared to 
the owl whose eyes are denied only the sight of the glorious Sun. 

To many impartial critics who are fully conscious of the vagaries of our present 
intellect in its pretended efforts to approach the Absolute and who are, therefore, 
prepared to reserve their judgment on a subject so alien to their whole 
experience the conduct of Sree Gaursundar, on this particular occasion, may still 
seem to be open to the charge of apparent inconsistency. They may properly 
enough ask whether Sree Gaursundar wanted to be regarded as the devotee of 
Krishna, or as Krishna Himself. If He wished to teach the people of this world 
the highest and only service of the Absolute Person by His own practice, how 
could the Manifestation of His real Nature as Recipient of worship be consistent 
with such purpose? 

This criticism overlooks the fact that there is a very close approximation to the 
Divinity in the highest stage of devotion when the devotee is apt to be persuaded 
that He is Krishna Himself and in that mood sets himself to imitating the 
Activities of Krishna. This is to be carefully distinguished from the erroneous 
conclusion of the professors of the cult of the undifferentiated Brahman that the 
fulfillment of worship, which they regard as only a probationary stage, is 
attained by complete merging with the Object of worship Who is conceived as 
being absolutely devoid of form and activity of any kind. 



In the case of the true devotee the worship is not a make-believe, temporary 
expedient as it is in the case of the other. If the service which we offer to Krishna 
is supposed to be due to certain changing circumstances it at once loses the 
character of sincerity and truth. The Vaishnava knows Himself to be the eternal 
servant of the Lord. He does not think it possible or desirable to merge in 
Krishna and thereby cease to be His servant. This is the ambition of those 
hypocrites who, while pretending to be the servants of a god whom they cannot 
or do not purposely attempt to define, really cherish in the back-ground of their 
disloyal minds the design of being some day freed from the irksome necessity of 
such service as the reward (?) of their insincerity! To them, therefore, the end is 
necessarily different from the means. 

By the adoption, for the time being, of a particular method, which is to be 
discarded on the attainment of the object of such endeavor, the Absolute cannot 
be realized. The relative can never lead, not even as a means, to the Absolute. It 
involves the fallacy of the major premise. The major premise in this case is too 
narrow and the middle term is undistributed. Untruth cannot lead to the Truth. 

By means of the Truth alone the Truth can be realized. As we do not possess the 
knowledge of the Truth and have no chance of ever knowing Him with the help 
of our present limited faculties we are either doomed to the state of eternal 
ignorance or liable to be enlightened from above by grace. There is no other 
alternative. The Vaishnava; therefore, accepts the latter alternative for attaining 
to the knowledge of the Truth. The abstract monist holds consistently neither to 
the one nor to the other. He does not believe fully either in his own ability, or in 
revelation. He has, therefore, no locus standi and necessarily tumbles headlong 
into the depths of Uncertainty which he calls God or Brahman in order to delude 
himself and his followers with the hope, which, despite all perversity, his and 
their natures instinctively demand, that they are for a time being as a sort of 
servants of the Absolute. When the true devotee exhibits the moods and 
activities of his Master he does so as a loyal servant rendered completely 
oblivious of his own separate existence and interests, by the contemplation of his 
Beloved. But he knows, specially at such moments more fully than ever, that he 
himself is not the Master. The conduct of the monist in his so-called realized 
state (siddhi) bears no resemblance to the activities of the devotee engrossed by 
the thoughts of his Master who, due to his consequent forgetfulness of his own 
self, thus enacts the Master’s part. But the monist ceases to function on merging 
with the Absolute ( ?). 


In the case of Sree Chaitanya He is sometimes found to be declaring Himself to 



be Krishna. Those who want to misunderstand will say that He was guilty 
of inconsistency of conduct because He could have easily avoided any 
suspicions being aroused regarding the sincerity of His own conduct by 
abstaining from such explicit declarations of His possession of the Master’s 
Nature. But at the same time we must remember that He was not merely 
simulating but actually personating the devotee. This is incomprehensible to us. 
But it happens to be the fact, as testified to by the author of Sree-Chaitanya- 
Charitamrita in the opening verses of his work dealing with the object of the 
Lord’s Appearance in this world. The real object, says Sree Krishnadas Kaviraj, 
was to taste His own sweetness by clothing Himself with the disposition and 
beauty of Sree Radhika. All other work could have been, and was as a matter of 
fact actually performed by the secondary Avataras. The Lord’s own special 
Purpose in appearing in the world, which cannot be realized by any except 
Himself, was to experience the love of Sree Radhika for Himself. He, therefore, 
could not be recognized by those who were not His innermost devotees. 

It is true that He was recognized as Krishna by His followers from whom He did 
not hide His real Nature. This was necessary for the purpose of the Leela and the 
possession of such knowledge by His devotees served to enhance the charm of 
their service and also to regulate their conduct. Therefore, these 
direct manifestations possess a double face like Sree Chaitanya Himself. Those 
who choose to ignore the face of the devotee, will miss the real significance of 
His Conduct and Teaching, no less than those who disregard the Divine face. All 
so-called partial truth is a deluding empiric conception and has no place 
in spiritual experience. In the absolute realm there is diversity, without 
mpturous dividing lines. 

In order to be able to understand the activities of the devotees of the Absolute 
Person Vishnu it is necessary to remember that enlightenment from above is the 
indispensable essential precondition. It is futile to attempt to know Him 
by means of our present limited understanding. Hence the necessity of 
having recourse to the spiritual preceptor and spiritual initiation. Initiation 
(diksha) consists in complete submission to the Absolute, which is equivalent to 
loyal and sincere submission to the guidance of the spiritual Preceptor, 
such submission being identical with obedience to the Word of Krishna as 
revealed in the satvata Shastras of which the spiritual Preceptor is both the only 
bona fide exponent and follower, the indispensable requisites for spiritual 
preceptorship. 



The act of the disciple in submitting to the Preceptor, is not to be confounded 
with the renunciation of the right of private judgment or subordinating one’s own 
judgment to another’s. Both Preceptor and disciple are under obligation to obey 
only the spiritual Scriptures. It is a matter of willing admission of 
superior progress on the path of the Eternal, and not a question of enforced 
servitude. Both preceptor and disciple are free and sincere enquirers of the 
Absolute by the method of unconditional submission to the Absolute. Both 
realize the necessity and the rationale of such submission. Both know that the 
only real freedom consists in absolute submission to the Truth. All these 
conditions are scrupulously observed in their mutual relationship by the bona 
fide Preceptor and disciple. The effect of such practical submission to the 
Absolute is freedom from the limitations of the materialized senses. No sooner is 
this act of complete self-surrender to the spiritual Preceptor made then the 
devotee is accepted by Krishna as His own. The body, senses and mind of such a 
person are surcharged with the spiritual essence by the Grace of Krishna. And 
the initiated thereby becomes eligible for eternally serving the Feet of Krishna 
by the purified body, senses and mind. 

The service of the Absolute is possible only on the plane of the Absolute and in 
the spiritual body by means of the spiritual senses. The soul of jiva 
possesses body, senses and mind. Krishna has also His own Divine Form, Senses 
and Mind. The soul of the jiva is constituted to serve Krishna with his 
spiritual body, mind and senses. The activities of the jiva in this world, in the 
fallen state, is a perverted deluded caricature of his true and eternal function. 

The body, mind and senses of the devotee appear to conditioned souls to be 
similar to their adventitious material body, senses and mind. But this is not really 
the case. It is the effect of delusion. The satvika perturbations which are 
possible only in the spiritual body, appear to the materialized vision of sinful 
jivas as possessing the character of physical manifestations. Such conclusion is 
equally deluded. Those who do not admit the necessity of submission to 
Krishna, cannot necessarily understand what the practice of such submission 
implies. 

The act of submission is the key to the spiritual realm. The denial of this is 
tantamount to ignorance. The refusal to submit to the Truth is the 
logical equivalent of the slavery of untmth by means of the deluding physical 
senses. The atheists are the only ignorant and unfree persons by their refusal to 
follow the guidance of their reason. 



Sree Gaursundar talked much while He was exhibiting the Leela of Direct 
Manifestation under the guise of nervous distemper. This confirmed 
the suspicions of those who were looking out for the symptoms of disease. 

The words uttered by the devotee are transcendental sounds that have the power 
of producing spiritual enlightenment by freeing from worldliness, if 
the unprejudiced ear is turned to them. The Transcendental Lord is served as 
the Transcendental Sounds. Those who admit the spiritual nature of the devotees 
of Krishna know that they are constantly engaged in the service of Krishna on 
the plane of the Absolute. The utterance of too much earthly sound is no doubt 
a sign of aggravated worldliness and is the malady of madness to which we 
are sometimes subjected by the mercy of Krishna so that we may be 
reminded thereby of the insubstantial and transitory nature of our most highly 
valued worldly possessions. One suffering from the aggravated disease of 
worldliness is not healed by the application of medicines which are supplied by 
physical Nature for the restoration of the worldly delusion. Such malady, 
treatment and cure all belong to the realm of delusions. They only serve to keep 
up the deluded idea of the wholesome nature of this world and its concerns for 
the correctness of atheists by such bitter experience. The delusion of those who 
put their trust in the delusion of the earthly physicians, who have a very 
high opinion of themselves, their science and its utility, is augmented by the 
practice of such trust. 

The maladies of both worldly patients and worldly doctors can be healed only if 
they learn to distinguish between the symptoms of real disease, the 
punishment of sin, and the similar spiritual manifestations of devotees who are 
absolutely free from all taint of worldliness, which are the only cure of all 
diseases. But the ill-fated have not the leisure, so wholly engrossed they choose 
to be in their worldly concerns and self-gratulations, to exercise their 
unprejudiced reason on the subject of their disease of the worldly sojourn. They 
are so absolutely persuaded of their own rectitude that they employ their wits in 
disproving the claims, to any real goodness, of those very persons who 
endeavour to cure them of their worldly disease by affording them the 
opportunity of listening to those redeeming sounds that bring the tidings of the 
Absolute to all benighted souls. They mistake, as the symptoms of an unsound 
mind with which unfortunately they are only too familiar, words and utterances 
that are the only medicine of their diseased souls. This infatuity is the corrective 
punishment of their unwarrantable self-complacency. Krishna’s Deluding Power 
is ever seeking the holes in the coats of everyone of us in order to disturb us in 
the most sensitive parts and thereby to cure us of the disease of such fatuous 



reliance on the resources of our deluded, limited understanding. He, therefore, 
sends His own beloved ones, in the guise of patients, to the doctors of this world 
for delivering such of them as keep their ears open to the voice of Krishna 
spoken through the mouths of His devotees. But the other sort seeing, sees not, 
and misses their only opportunity, as further corrective punishment for their 
gross, deliberate worldliness. This is the fate of those worldly-wise people who 
consider the Unrestrained Talk of Sree Gaursundar as a conclusive proof of His 
madness. 

Of course it is possible, not inevitable for a time even after initiation, for a 
person to exhibit the state of suffering from the actual effects of 
sensuous activities that he had indulged in before his initiation. This does not 
come amiss to the bona fide probationer who never wants to get rid of his 
merited sufferings in lieu of his intention to serve. Such suffering causes the 
genuine probationer no pain but, on the contrary, is to him a source of 
unalloyed spiritual bliss as providing greater opportunities of service. To the 
uninitiated the sight of apparent suffering of the devotee presents a double face, 
viz., of those patient sufferings and merited punishment, both of which are untrue 
and are a trick of the Deluding Power to prevent the obstinate impious from 
serving the devotee as devotee. The doctor who may be called by the devotee to 
treat him is afforded the opportunity of rendering unconscious service to 
the Vaishnava and will obtain his reward in the shape of a lessening of 
his worldliness, if he is careful not to allow his mind to cherish any 
prejudice against the bona fide of the real devotee merely from the fact that he 
might have been guilty of worldly conduct in his past life. This total absence of 
all irrational prejudice is possible only in a person who is sincerely conscious 
of his own imperfections. 

A doctor who treats a real sadhu without prejudice thereby unconsciously serves 
Krishna Himself and obtains as his reward freedom, from all ignorance by the 
mercy of the sadhu who is pleased to manifest to him his real spiritual nature by 
the will of Krishna. As soon as one obtains the real sight of the Vaishnava he 
instantly awakes from the deep waking slumber of ignorance to which he was 
being lulled by the deluding tricks of Maya. No amount of any so-called 
unprejudiced service rendered to a non-Vaishnava can lead to such a result. On 
the contrary if a non-Vaishnava is too zealously served his so-called benefactor 
(?) is liable to be punished by an increase of his delusion as he would thereby 
only develop the vanity of false humanity which makes him overlook the 
distinction between the Vaishnava and the non-Vaishnava as recipients of our 



service. Such a person can hardly be expected to be ever able, unless after he is 
really cured of his fondness for non-Vaishnavas, to grasp the real significance of 
the eternal distinction between the spiritual and the material, or to realize the 
truth that his soul has no affinity whatever with the objects and aspirations of 
this world. 

The apparent defects of a bona fide Vaishnava have been aptly compared to the 
mud and froth that are sometimes found in the holy water of the Ganges. 

These in no way affect the eternal and unchangeable purity of the sacred stream 
that issues from the Holy Feet of the Supreme Lord. On the contrary even such 
mud and froth themselves imbiblie, by contact with the chastening water of 
the Ganges, the quality of delivering all really unclean persons from the 
sticking dirt of worldliness. It requires a really impartial and supremely 
patient judgment to be able to enter into this spirit of the philosophy of theism. 
Sree Gaursundar’s teachings are a sealed book to the crooked and captious, but 
are easily understood by the really candid. Worldly merit or demerit is of no 
help in this matter. Sincerity of the soul is ~e one thing needful. Insincerity is 
the concomitant of worldliness which is the cause of all our self-made 
ignorance and misery. 

But some may still raise the objection that Sree Gaursundar could have done 
even greater good and obtained a better hearing for His teachings if He 
had exhibited no such symptoms even of apparent madness. Of course the 
Supreme Lord is free to do whatever He likes and there can be no defect in what 
He Wills or Does. Gaursundar was, in this instance, exhibiting the Leela of the 
ideal devotee. The necessity for such performance lay in the fact that the 
deliverance of all fettered souls is absolutely dependent on the realization of 
the transcendental nature of the devotee of God. Such realization can 
alone enlighten him regarding the spiritual nature of His own proper self. The 
object of Sree Gaursundar was to remove all misconceptions that stand in the 
way of such realization. 

One of the commonest fallacies of this wide world is that religion is only one 
specific department of human activities out of many; or, in other words that it is 
possible to serve both God and Mammon at the same time, or at any rate 
in recurring succession. This idea, it would not be an exaggeration to observe, 
has been allowed by culpable negligence on the part of writers to pervade 
all literature of modern times. Religion is pedantically differentiated from 
politics, from morality, from aesthetics and from worldly activities of all sorts, 



not so much for the purpose of emphasizing the eternal distinction between 
the spiritual and the material but with the sinister motive of restricting the scope 
of religious activity itself within defined worldly bounds. If this fallacy, which 
is so widely disseminated, once finds a real lodgment in the brain, one can 
never realize the nature of the spiritual service of God, nor understand that it 
is possible to practice the same even while we are placed in this world 
without doing harm to anybody. I may notice in passing that the practice of so- 
called religious toleration, which is so much affected by a particular stamp of 
thinkers, is also based upon the above fallacy, viz., that it is possible without any 
real danger to anyone to keep religion out of the other affairs of life. One, who 
prays regularly to God in the evening and morning and thinks that thereby 
his obligations to Godhead are at least partially fulfilled, utterly misunderstands 
the nature of his duty as the exclusive servant of the Lord. The obligation to 
serve Krishna is a self-imposed principle which knows no limits. Krishna can 
and ought to be served in all circumstances by each and every person of this 
world. One who really serves Him does so in his every act and thought. The 
devotee serves Krishna at all times both when he wakes and when he seems to 
sleep. Every act of the devotee under every circumstance is an act of service. 

One who fails to understand this fundamental principle of spiritual existence, 
cannot recognize the devotee of God and is doomed to sin and worldliness for 
this reason, notwithstanding all his exertions resembling the external conduct of 
the real sadhus. 

The devotee of Krishna serves Him under all circumstances and he does nothing 
else. He neither eats nor sleeps but only serves. When He exhibits the activity of 
apparent eating and sleeping he does so for our benefit in order to show us how 
ever we, for whom eating and sleeping are necessary, can get rid of this false 
existence with its whole round of so-called interminable duties and obligations, 
if we only obey the Word of God manifested in the holy Scriptures and 
explained by the discourse and practice, of the eternal servants of Krishna who, 
by His command, make themselves visible to our mortal senses and who live and 
move in our midst for the fulfillment of the beneficial Purpose of the Supreme 
Lord in regard to ourselves. Such is the real nature of the true servants of 
Krishna. The Vaishnava tells us that the soul of every entity has the capacity of 
serving Krishna however circumstanced he may appear to be. The souls of the 
stone, the tree, the baby in the womb, the lunatic, the dying and the dead, are all 
equally eligible in this matter. Because no circumstance of this deluding world, 
however formidable or adverse it may seem to be to our eclipsed cognition, can 
offer any real obstruction to the spiritual service of the Lord. It is the truth of this 



proposition that the devotees are engaged in establishing for the benefit of the 
unbelievers of this world, by all their teaching and practice. 

It would be a great blunder, therefore, to suppose that any evil can befall the 
servants of Krishna, here or elsewhere. The devotee is put by Krishna in 
all possible situations in order to train up the judgment of those who profess 
to believe in them It is only when a person’s budding faith survives this 
purgatorial ordeal that he is in a position to understand the teaching of the 
Vaishnava which is identical with his conduct. Conversely the hypocrites are 
prevented from committing the offense of the pretense of serving the devotee by 
such constant searching of their weakest points. These exhibitions serve the 
doubly beneficial purpose of enhancing the faith of all sincere seekers of the 
Truth and keeping at a distance all those who have no inclination to serve 
Krishna but only themselves. 

In this world we cannot really serve Krishna; we can only serve those servants of 
the Lord who are mercifully sent by Him into our midst to deliver us from the 
state of sin and ignorance. Krishna cannot be served by the sinful and 
the ignorant. Those who think that it is possible to serve Krishna with 
the resources of our limited understandings or by the physical bodies, 
confound the transcendental service of Krishna which passes the understanding 
of man with the corresponding atheistical performances. To complete this 
delusion they are also firmly persuaded by reason of their cultivated aversion to 
Krishna that whatever any individual sinner may choose to fancy as the Truth 
contains an element of truth. What they really want is that Truth must serve them 
and not they the Truth. They want to be the masters and not the servants 
of Krishna. But these irrational, hypocritical, self-seeking, misguided atheists 
are prevented, by their perversity due to such senseless prostitution of 
their freedom of will, from having the Sight of Krishna or His devotees. 

Those who fail to realize the fatal nature of the offense committed against the 
Vaishnavas, are unfit to serve the devotees of Krishna although by such 
service alone conditioned souls can be delivered from the consequences of their 
willful transgressions. It is an offense against the Vaishnavas to suppose that a 
bona fide Vaishnava does anything else than the service of Krishna which 
is absolutely free from the least taint of worldliness. It is also an offense 
against the Vaishnavas to serve or associate with a non-Vaishnava, or to suppose 
that a sinner while in the state of sin is a Vaishnava. Until we are freed from 
these impious errors we cannot be said to desire the mercy of the true devotees 



of the Lord. The transcendental activities and teachings of Sree Gaursundar as 
expounded and practiced by His associates and the followers of His 
associates, can alone save us from these errors to which an Age given to 
superficial controversies, like the present, has an abnormal besetting tendency 
to subscribe. 

The real significance of these Pastimes of the Lord, although they happened to 
be perfectly explicit, were not apparently permitted to be understood even by the 
devotees in order to impress upon worldlings the truth that no one is able to 
know Him until and unless He enables one to know. 

The tidings of the recovery of Sree Gaursundar filled everyone with joy. The 
Vaishnavas specially availed of this opportunity of impressing upon Him 
the necessity of serving the Feet of Sree Krishna by arguing the reason that there 
is no certainty of life or sanity. Sree Chaitanya was naturally partial to 
the Vaishnavas. Their exhortations made Him smile as He stopped to do 
obeisance to them all on His way in the company of His innumerable pupils. 

Sree Chaitanya then resumed His duties as teacher. He taught His pupils inside 
the Chandimandap of the house of Mukunda-Sanjaya. While the Lord was 
thus engaged in expounding the texts to His pupils perfumed medicated oil 
was applied to His Head by some exceptionally fortunate persons of many 
good deeds. Sree Chaitanya took His seat in the middle of the room and 
was surrounded by His pupils who sat in a circle round their Teacher. 

That gathering is without a parallel in the annals of the world. Sree 
Brindavandas Thakur ransacked the Scriptures for a parallel instance for the 
purpose of comparison. At Badarikasrama Sree Narayana teaches Sanaka and 
other Rishis sitting round Him in a circle. The Act of Sree Gaursundar resembled 
this Leela of Sree Narayana Himself. The comparison holds good for the reason 
that the Darling of Sachi is the Same as Sree Narayana who dwells at 
Badarikasrama. It was, therefore, the very same Pastime of Badarikasrama that 
Sree Chaitanya was thus enacting in the company of His disciples at Nabadwip. 

At the conclusion of His teaching by mid-day Sree Gaursundar would go out 
with His pupils to the Ganges for His Bath. After sporting for a time in the 
holy water of the Ganges He returned home and worshipped Vishnu. Offering 
water and circumambulating Sree Tulasi He sat to His meal by uttering 
repeatedly the Name of Hari. Sree Lakshmi Devi served the Food and the Lord 
of Vaikuntha ate the same. The pious mother was privileged to have the full view 



of this Sight. After meal He used to chew betel and then retired for rest. Sree 
Lakshmi Devi tended His Feet as the Lord laid Himself down in His Bed. The 
Lord then bent His Auspicious Glance on the goddess who serves in the office of 
Sleep of the Supreme Lord. Having rested for a while Sree Gaursundar used to 
go out of the house a second time with His books. 



Chapter 12 In the Sreets of Nabadwip 


Sree Gaursundar as Professor chose the afternoons for visiting the citizens of 
Nabadwip in the company of His pupils. He graciously accosted all the 
people; and everyone entertained feelings of the deepest regard for the Lord. 

This respectful attitude towards Him, which was universal, was a matter of 
instinct, as at this period no one was aware of the Divinity of the Lord. The 
Lord frequented all the streets of the city affording the people an opportunity 
of beholding Him Who is inaccessible even to the gods. 

The Lord now behaved with the same absence of reserve on these visits to the 
citizens as we noticed on the occasion of His nervous malady. In this case also 
no one was able to recognize Him although He stood fully manifest to 
all seeming. Thakur Brindavandas has handed down the following particulars 
of these activities. 

On one of these occasions Sree Gaursundar presented Himself at the door of a 
weaver’s home. The weaver at once made obeisance to Him with the greatest 
respect. The Lord asked Him to bring out his best cloth, which the weaver did at 
once. The Lord asked what price he expected for his cloth. The weaver replied 
that he would accept whatever was offered. After the bargain had been settled 
the Lord said He had no money with Him. The weaver replied that it was not 
necessary for Him to pay immediately. He might take the cloth, wear it and pay 
in ten days or a fortnight or by installments, according to His convenience. The 
Lord bestowed His auspicious Glance on that weaver as He left the place. 

The Lord then entered the quarter of the town which was occupied by the 
milkmen. He took His Seat at the door-way of the home of one of the 
cowherds. The Lord, by the privilege of a Brahmana commanded him jocosely 
in an imperious tone to bring out his milk and curds, saying that He would 
favour him that day by accepting the best of the gifts that his household could 
provide. The cowherds beheld it was the God of love Himself Who thus asked 
for their gift. With great respect they offered their best seat to Him. The Lord 
continued to talk in a jocose vein to the cowherds. They addressed Him as their 
‘maternal uncle’. Some asked Him to eat their cooked food in their Company. A 
certain milkman took Him to his home on his shoulders. A few remarked that He 
had once eaten all the cooked food that was in their houses and He might 
probably recollect it. Saraswati, the Goddess of speech, spoke truly, but the 



milkmen themselves did not know. The Lord laughed at these words of the 
cowherds. All the milkmen now brought out their milk, ghee, curds, sar and 
excellent butter and gladly gave to the Lord. The Lord expressed His satisfaction 
at such friendly conduct of the cowherds. 

He then went forward and entered the home of a dealer in perfumes (gandha - 
vanika). The trader made his bow at the Feet of the Lord with great respect. 

The Lord asked him to bring out his best perfumes. As he did so the Lord 
inquired their price. The trader replied that the price must be already known 
to Him and that it would be hardly proper to demand any price from Him. 

That trader then begged to be allowed to apply the perfumes to His Body and 
to return home for that day. If enough of fragrance persisted till next day and 
did not cease after bath, then He might pay any price that He liked. With 
these words the trader, with his own hand, put his perfumes all over the Holy 
Form of the Lord in a rapture of joy that was perfectly unaccountable. ‘The 
Supreme Lord’, observes Thakur Brindavandas, ‘abiding in the heart of all 
beings, ever attracts their minds unto Himself. Who is not bewitched by the 
Sight of His Beauty?’ 

The Lord next made His way to the home of a garland-maker. The garland- 
maker was smitten with the extraordinary Beauty of the Lord and did obeisance 
to Him after offering a seat with great respect. The Lord asked Him to give good 
garlands and told him that He had no money with Him. The garland-maker 
noticing that He had the appearance of one who had actually realized Godhead 
said that He might not pay. With these words the garland-maker placed his 
garlands on the Divine Form of the Lord. This made Sree Gaursundar and all His 
pupils laugh. The Lord bestowing His auspicious Glance on that garland-maker, 
made his way to the home of a betel-seller. 

The betel-seller was taken by surprise on seeing the Lord Himself crossing the 
threshold of His humble abode. In his delight the betel-seller, of his own accord, 
offered Him his betels which made the Lord laugh. The Lord asked why he was 
offering the betel made up with betel-nut without demanding any price. The 
betel-seller made reply that it was due to a spontaneous impulse of his mind. The 
Lord began to chew the prepared betel that had been offered. The betel-seller 
then presented the Lord with betel-leaf, camphor and other spices of excellent 
quality used in making up the betel, desiring Him with great reverence, to accept 
it and would not take any price. Sree Gaursundar favoured that betel-seller in 



this fashion. 


The Lord visited the residence of a dealer in conches who made Him, obeisance 
with great reverence on beholding Him. The Lord asked for good 
conches declaring that as He had no money with Him He did not know how He 
could buy them. The conch dealer, at once gave the Lord his best conches with 
the remark that He might pay at His leisure and consider Himself under 
no obligation to pay The Lord was very much pleased by hearing these words 
of the conch-dealer and bestowed on him the favour of His auspicious Glance. 

In this manner the Lord visited regularly the houses of all the towns-people of 
Nabadwip. 

The Lord next made His way to the house of a diviner who could predict 
everything. The Lord told him that as he was reputed to be a very 
competent person He had come to him to inquire about information regarding 
Himself as to what He was in His former births. ‘Right’ said the diviner. But on 
applying himself as a preliminary to repeating mentally the mantram of Gopala 
that diviner of excellent deeds at once beheld the Divine Form with the bluish 
hue, Four-Armed, holding the Conch, Disc, Club and Lotus, His Breast 
adorned with the jewel Kaustuva and the sign of Srivatsa. He saw the Lord in the 
prison-chamber at the dead of night with His parents in front of Him in the act 
of adoration. Presently he had a vision that the father, taking up his new-born 
Boy in his arms, put Him away that very night in the cowherd settlement. He 
saw again the Nude, Beautiful, two-Armed Child, with the belt of jingling bells 
on His Waist, tasting the butter with both Hands. The diviner in fact saw all 
those Signs that belong to his own cherished Divinity on Whom he mediated at 
all time He beheld once again the divine form, with the Flute touching His Lips, 
in the triple-bent attitude, surrounded by the milk-maids, 
discoursing instrumental and vocal music. On beholding this extraordinary 
vision the diviner opened his eyes in wonder and fixing his gaze on Gauranga 
went on repeating his recitals. He then supplicated the Deity of his cherished 
worship in these words, ‘Listen, O Gopala, divine Boy! Do Thou show me 
quickly who this Brahmana was in His former Births.’ 

Thereupon, the diviner had a vision of the Lord, Bow in Hand, of grass-green 
Hue, seated in the Attitude of the warrior. He saw Him again in the midst of 
the Cataclysm of complete destruction in the form of the wonderful Boar 
Whose Tusk was holding aloft this world. He saw Him once more Appearing as 



the Man-lion, of most fierce Aspect, infinitely Tender to His devotee. He saw 
Him again in the Act of deluding the sacrificing King Bali, in the Form of the 
Dwarf. 

Then He beheld Him in the form of the Fish in the waters of the Deluge, playing 
merrily in the Flood. That diviner of excellent deeds saw the Lord once again in 
the Form of the maddened Holder of the Plough, with the Club in His Hand. The 
diviner saw the shining Form of Jagannath with Subhadra in the middle and 
Balarama on His right. The diviner had a vision in is manner of the true Nature 
of the Lord, but yet he understood nothing. ‘Such’, says Thakur Brindavandas, 

‘is the force of the deluding power of the Lord.’ 

The diviner was very much astonished and thought within himself that the 
Brahmana must be a great sorcerer or He might be some god who had perchance 
appeared to him in a frolic in the guise of a Brahmana in order to delude him. He 
also duly noticed the indications of the super-human fiery glow irradiating the 
body of the Brahmana and was perplexed thinking that he was being befooled 
for pretending to know everything. While the diviner was busy with these 
thoughts the Lord said laughing: ‘Who am I? What do you see? tell me 
everything without reserve.” The diviner said, “Be pleased to leave me alone for 
the present. Let me repeat my mantram with a clear mind. I shall tell You in the 
afternoon.’ ‘Very gook,” said the Lord as He went off on His way laughing. 

The Lord now presented Himself at the home of His beloved Sridhar. The Lord 
often visited Sridhar at his house on various excuses and never left him 
without exchanging jokes with him for a short time. On seeing the Lord Sridhar 
at once approached Him with great respect and made Him take a seat. Sridhar 
was naturally of a most gentle disposition. The Lord’s behaviour was that of a 
most restless and arrogant person, thereupon the following dialogue ensued 
between Sree Gaursundar and Sridhar. 

The Lord asked, ‘Sridhar, you take the Name of Hari constantly. Why do you yet 
suffer such great privations? Tell Me how it is that you suffer from want of food 
and clothing by serving the Lord of the Goddess of wealth?’ Sridhar replied, ‘but 
I do not actually starve and I also put on clothing of some sort, be it long or 
short’, the Lord went on, ‘I notice your cloth is patched at a dozen places and 
there is no straw to the thatch of your hut. Is there the person in the town who is 
stinted for food and clothing by worshipping Chandi and Bishahari ?’ Sridhar 
said, ‘Bipra, Thou hast said well. But yet the time of all persons passes all the 



same. The king lives in a palace of gems and eats and dresses most sumptuously; 
the birds inhabit the tree-top. Nevertheless the time of both passes away all the 
same. They enjoy the fruits of their respectively acts awarded by the Will of 
Isvara.’ 

The Lord said, ‘You have immense wealth. You dine on it most sumptuously in 
secret, when will that day be when I shall make your secret known 
to everybody? then shall I see how you can deceive the people so!’ said 
Sridhar, ‘Pandit’ it is better for you to return home. It is not meet for us to 
quarrel with each other., The Lord said, ‘I am not going to let you off in this 
fashion. Tell me at once what you are going to give Me., Sridhar replied, ‘I live 
by selling the bark of the plantain tree. You better say what at all I can give your 
Reverence.’ The Lord said, ‘I am not just now going to take the buried treasures 
that you possess. I shall have it later. For the present give me gratis plantain, 
radishes and the soft core of the plantain tree. I shall not trouble you if you do 
so.’ Sridhar thought within himself, ‘The Brahmana is so very arrogant. He 
is certainly: going to thrash me one of these days. And even if He hurts me 
what can I do to a Brahmana? Neither can I afford to give Him daily without 
being paid. Still what a Brahmana takes even by force or guile is surely my 
good fortune, and I shall, therefore, give Him everyday., After meditating in 
this manner Sridhar said, ‘Listen, Your Reverence You need not pay anything. I 
shall willingly give you core, plantain, radishes and bark. So be pleased not 
to quarrel with me any more., The Lord said, ‘This is well and good. There will 
be no more quarrel from now if only you always give Me good core, plantain 
and radishes.’ 

The Lord dined everyday off the plantain-bark of Sridhar. The core, plantain and 
radishes of Sridhar were the most relished dishes at His Daily Meal. The Lord 
ate the gourd, that grew on the plant trained on Sridhar’s thatch, cooked in milk 
and pepper. The Lord now asked, ‘Sridhar, what do you think I am? I shall go 
home as soon as you tell Me only this.’ Sridhar said, ‘You are a Brahmana, a part 
and parcel of Vishnu Himself., The Lord replied, ‘You do not know. I come of a 
family of milkmen. But you see Me as the Son of a Brahmana. 

I, however, know Myself to be a milk-man.’ Sridhar laughed on hearing the 
Words of the Lord and did not recognize his own cherished Deity by the force of 
His Deluding Power. Said the Lord, ‘Sridhar, I will tell you the Truth. All 
the greatness of your Ganges is due to Myself.’ Sridhar protested, ‘Well, 

Nimai Pandit, art Thou not afraid even of the Ganges? Man grows sober 



with advancing years. But Your restlessness is increasing with double speed’. 
After indulging in such merry repertoire with Sridhar Lord Gauranga-Hari 
returned to His own Home. 

The above episodes may seem to represent the Lord in the character of a begging 
Brahmana who is out among the hard-worked artisans and poor people to 
squeeze from them the best that their poverty can yield, there are two subjects in 
this picture, viz., the conduct of the Lord and of the humble folk, both of which 
deserve our careful consideration. 

Sree Gaursundar did not accept the gifts of the poor for any charitable purpose 
but frankly for His Own Personal Use. He does not appear to have 
rendered them any service in return; those people did not expect nor wish for any 
return. Neither did they apparently give their things with the idea that they were 
giving them to a needy beggar, they gave from a feeling of reverence and not 
on account of His individual qualities of which they had not always a 
very decidedly all-round favourable opinion, even Sridhar admitted to himself 
that the Brahmana was unduly arrogant, the soothsayer, who to many 
persons would seem to have been the most favoured of all, took Him to be a 
Person versed in the Black Art Who was trying to befool him. so all these people 
gave away their best things to this arrogant brahmana in conformity with 
a customary practice and not for the reason that Sree Gaursundar possessed 
any outstanding merit or worth of His Own. Sridhar even complains that 
the Brahmana was not above using both force as well as dissimulation to obtain 
the lion’s share of his scanty wares. Sree Gaursundar may, thus appear to 
be evidently exploiting the credulity of ordinary superstitious, ignorant, masses 
for His own personal profit and thereby countenancing the objectionable 
practices of those degenerate Brahmanas who go about begging for their 
livelihood. 

Why did those poor people give Him their best things? Let Sridhar speak for the 
rest. Sridhar said he did not covet the wealth of kings. He thought that the time 
of himself was passing in exactly the same way as that of kings and he did not 
hold Godhead responsible for making any inequitable difference between a king 
and himself as in his opinion there was really no difference. But neither was 
Sridhar a cynic. He was aware that the things of this world were capable of being 
rightly used in the service of Vishnu; and that no depth of poverty was an excuse 
for the neglect of this paramount duty, giving to the Brahmana was in his 
opinion, identical with giving to Vishnu ‘because Vishnu was represented in this 



world by the Brahmana for accepting such service through His devotees. True, 
the Brahmana in question, viz., Sree Gaursundar, appeared to him to be very 
arrogant and dissembling. But he himself was also not prepared to give willingly 
anything to the Brahmana on the worthless plea of his utter poverty; and, 
therefore, the only alternative was to suffer his things to be taken by force or 
fraud by the Brahmana who did him the favour of accepting his things in 
this boisterous fashion’. This is the inside of the heart of Sridhar. This was the 
faith of all those humble people. 

But can we really serve Godhead by offering Him the things of this world . Sree 
Gaursundar says we can. If we regard Godhead and the objects offered 
to Godhead as categories of this world the process is objectionable involving 
the degradation of worship. Godhead is not a receiver of any earthly objects. 

But we have also nothing to offer Him except these very earthly objects, because 
we ourselves are of this Earth at present. Sree Gaursundar says that we are 
not earthly; but if we attain our natural, super-mundane, state we are in a 
position to realize that the objects of this Earth have also a spiritual relationship 
to ourselves. This spiritual side of the things of this world does not manifest 
itself to us as long as we continue to regard them as being meant for gratifying 
our hankering for worldly enjoyment. Such attitude is the sign as well as cause 
of our real ignorance of our true self. 

There is such a thing as the soul, apart from limited and temporary entities of all 
gross and subtle types. This soul is our proper self. The vision of our souls is for 
the present clouded by the exclusive contemplation of alien objects which we are 
apt to consider as having affinity with ourselves. The soul in the sinful state 
values only such use of things as can afford him pleasure in some form or other. 
He constantly strives to multiply the opportunity and scope of such enjoyment. 
This vision is, however, the clouded vision. It was not Sridhar’s vision. Sridhar 
realized that the enjoyment of the things of this world could not really satisfy his 
soul. The things of this world are meant not to be enjoyed but to be used in some 
other way. They are to be offered unconditionally to One for Whose Sole 
enjoyment they are meant. And Who is that One Person ? He cannot be any 
sinful creature. He is no mortal, but Godhead Himself. The Brahmana is part and 
parcel of Vishnu. Vishnu also appears in this gross world for enjoying the things 
of this world. Sridhar believed that He does so for the benefit of sinners, that 
Vishnu appears in the form of Brahmanas who are free from all sin. A Brahmana 
knows the proper use of the things of this world. He does not seek his own 
enjoyment but serves Godhead therewith. It is because he possesses this 



knowledge that he is a Brahmana. If anything is given willingly or unwillingly to 
a Brahmana it is offered to Godhead and is sure to reach Him through the 
Brahmana. The things of this world in this relationship to Sree Gaursundar also 
appeared to Sridhar in this light. This was so because Sridhar’s soul was in his 
natural state who could realize that he has no affinity with the things of this 
world as a means of his worldly enjoyment. 

Sridhar’s philosophy might seem to make no provision for the material 
prosperity of the world. It may also seem to be akin to blind faith. The 
last objection has been answered in the preceding paragraph. The so-called 
clearsightedness of the conditioned souls is their real blindness. Our faith in 
the value of the things of this world as objects of our enjoyment, is the real 
blind faith. Sridhar’s faith is not blinded by this essentially- irrational partiality 
in favour of worldliness the utter-worthlessness of which must be patent to all as 
a fact of even one’s daily and hourly experience. Sridhar’s philosophy does 
not, indeed, trouble about the progress of this world which it attributes to the 
Direct Action of Godhead awarding the material fruits of the sinful endeavours 
of conditioned souls who alone happen to be the denizens of this mundane 
world. He regards so-called worldly prosperity more as a snare than a help. But 
he is careful not to ignore, for this reason, the very existence of this world. 

The world is not an illusion. 

So long as we are placed in this world we cannot but have to do with things 
mundane. Our duty, while we are so placed, must however, be to use all kinds of 
material facility for the service of Vishnu Who has no wants of His Own 
but Who condescends to condescends to receive our offerings in order to enable 
us to live, also under these adverse circumstances, a life of service. The service 
of Vishnu is the only true and eternal religion. It’s truth can be recognized by our 
clouded understanding during those lucid intervals when we are impelled by 
the experience of worldliness to be impartial seekers of a really 
wholesome function. There are sinless people who are not subject to the 
domination of the enjoyable side of phenomena to whom all things of this world 
disclose their spiritual forms who teach us to serve Vishnu with their help. The 
condition that is ensured by such service is the only true progress and one that, 
instead of augmenting our blindness, serves to clear up our blinded vision. 

But we may still be disposed to ask certain questions, ‘Will the offering of our 
best things to unworthy and beggarly Brahmanas, who claim them as a matter of 
right for the purpose of gratifying their worldly appetites, also conduce to such a 



result?’ It is not necessary to discriminate between a real Brahmana and a real 
non-Brahmana? And who, indeed, is a real Brahmana? Did Sridhar or the other 
poor people really know that Sree Gaursundar was Vishnu Himself? Evidently 
they did not bother. Is such blind devotion to caste Brahmanas recommended as 
a reliable and wholesome principle by the above episodes? Neither did Sridhar 
nor any of the other townsmen, who were so liberal to Sree Gaursundar, 
entertain any suspicions regarding the worth of Sree Gaursundar as recipient of 
their gifts. They did not venture to gauge the worth of a Brahmana by the 
measure of their clouded understanding. In this view their conduct was not the 
denial but the perfection, of the truly rational attitude. They waited to be 
enlightened, without muddling. This excellence of judgment was the natural 
concomitant of their own unworldly life which is an indispensable preparatory 
for the spiritual. They will thereby soon learn about the real Truth and be saved 
from the degrading effects of indiscriminate, worldly charity to beggars for a 
worldly purpose. It is the only duty of all true Brahmanas to enlighten everyone 
who really wants to be enlightened. Unworldly conduct in every relationship of 
life is the only proof of the possession of such desire. This mode of imparting 
enlightenment is the eternal Dispensation of Providence and it never fails to 
operate with unerring beneficence in ah cases. Those who are charitable to 
Brahmanas from any worldly motive never have the sight of a real Brahmana 
who possesses the knowledge of Godhead. 

But it may be argued that Sree Gaursundar was encouraging the trade of a betel- 
maker by accepting his service. Is not the trade of a betel-seller altogether 
harmful? Will such encouragement not be misunderstood as approval of 
a practice which is condemned by the Srimad Bhagavatam Srimad 
Bhagavatam warns us against sensuous enjoyment of the objects of this world 
and proceeds to enumerate categorically certain forms of sensuous enjoyment 
that are to be avoided by all means. It says no doubt that no rules are applicable 
to those who really serve Krishna. Srimad Bhagavatam does not mean that the 
bona fide servants of Krishna are privileged to indulge in sensuous conduct. 
What it means is that Krishna is served by the senses of those who are 
perfectly unmindful of their own enjoyment. We are not required to give up 
anything we are required to learn the only proper method of using everything. 
Till we understand this true method we should agree to be taught, by desisting 
from the wrong method which would otherwise prevent us from knowing truly 
by the only effective method, viz ., that of actual personal experience. 


Sree Gaursundar did not declare a crusade against the externality of conduct of 



any kind. All activities are a part and parcel of the eternal scheme of the universe 
and can and need never be abolished. Sree Gaursundar desired that we should 
acquire the right vision which enables us to employ all things of this world in the 
service of Krishna, without interfering with the external appearance which is the 
eternal perverted concomitant reflection of the real shutting from us the true 
view of the Reality. But the perverted reflection can no more be abolished than 
the reality. Both exist for ever in their respective reciprocal relationship. It is not 
they but our attitude to them that requires to be adjusted. Gaursundar declares 
that the smarta view, i.e., the ordinary view of so-called orthodox Hindus, which 
regards a thing of this world as pure or impure by its worldly reference, is 
opposed to the teaching of the spiritual Scriptures. Nothing can be impure except 
the attitude of the observer. To the pure vision everything is necessarily pure. 
According to the Bhagavatam the paramahansas are above all those rules that 
are meant for the guidance of conditioned souls. This leniency to them means 
neither undue partiality nor indiscriminate license. The Scriptures provide for the 
strictest guidance of all dissociable souls by the eternally free sadhus who alone 
can understand the real spirit of those regulations and can, therefore, apply them 
in the proper way. This is so because they themselves always spontaneously 
follow the spirit that is negatively represented by those regulations. The real 
devotees are privileged to know that for no one there is any such thing as 
impurity in the sphere of spiritual service. Those who, being themselves averse 
to Godhead, set up as teachers of the Bhagavatam, delude themselves as well as 
their pupils by their false teachings. 

The eternally free state is not a figment of the atheist’s imagination. It is, on the 
contrary, the most decisive proof of one’s utter ignorance of the state of 
the devotee to suppose that the true nature of such state can be realized by 
the imagination of one who does not serve God. It is tantamount to 
confounding the shadow with the substance, darkness with light; because such 
knowledge is real ignorance and such imaginary purity is the most insidious 
form of aversion to Godhead. Such deluded people bring upon themselves the 
richly deserved punishment that is due to their hopeless pursuit of the shadow 
under the willfully mistaken plea that it is the substance. The identification of the 
unreal with the real, of the wrong idea with the object, is the consciously 
perpetrated great error of all empiric speculations regarding the Reality. It is 
equivalent to conscious or unconscious denial of all reality on the dishonest plea 
that the Reality is incomprehensible to our present limited understanding. On 
this misapplied plea are we justified in deliberately choosing to be content with 
an imaginary ‘moral, order and call it also ‘real, on the testimony of a 



gratuitously assumed universal instinct of the race? In other words are we to 
recognize the failure of our pervert reason to know the Reality by stifling the 
faculty of reason itself? Sree Gaursundar warns us against such useless act of 
suicide and declares that the Reality really exists and can also be really known to 
us despite the self-created insufficiency of our present understanding; and that it 
is, therefore, our first and only duty to try to realise the Truth by adopting a 
life which is really free from all taint of duplicity. That this is also the only 
truly rational course and one whose success is a foregone conclusion. 

On His return home after accosting Sridhar in the manner described above, Sree 
Gaursundar seated Himself at the door of the room that was consecrated to the 
worship of Vishnu The students, who had been in attendance, departed to their 
respective homes. As He caught sight of the rising full moon the Lord’s heart 
was filled with loving recollections of the Moon of Brindavana. He thereupon 
began to discourse strains of the Flute, Whose sweetness was never experienced 
in this world. But no one could catch it except the mother. 

On hearing the note of the Flute that bewitches the triple universe, the mother 
fainted on the spot by complete immersion in the ocean of bliss. 

Presently recovering her external consciousness, having compassed her mind, 
she listened to the unprecedented melody of the Divine Flute. She perceived 
the sound to proceed from the direction where Gaurangasundar was seated 
Having this wonderful aural experience the mother came out of the room and 
found her Son still sitting at Vishnu’s doorstep. She could no longer hear the 
strains of the Flute but beheld the Disc of the Moon in the Bosom of her Son. 

She saw distinctly the Sphere of the Moon inside the Breast of her Son and 
looked about her in amazement. 

Returning to her room the mother began to think about the reason, but could not 
arrive at any solution. Such was the high fortune of mother Sachi who constantly 
beheld such never-ending Divine Manifestations. One day during the night 
mother Sachi heard hundreds of people singing and playing on musical 
instruments. She heard various musical sounds made by the mouth, the sound as 
of a dance, the tread of feet as if a vast Rasa Pastime was in progress. One day 
she found that all the house, the rooms, doors and windows, were made 
exclusively of light. Another day she had a sight of celestial nymphs, beautiful 
as Lakshmi Herself, their hands adorned with the shining lotus flower. 


One day she had a vision of shining gods and, after just catching sight of them, 



could not see them again. All these visions are nothing at all impossible in 
the case of the Mother Whom the Veda declares to be the very Form of Devotion 
to Vishnu. Even those, on whom the Mother casts Her auspicious glance but 
once, are thereby endowed with the eligibility of beholding those manifestations. 

Thus did Sree Gaursundar, Wearer of the Garland of Wild Flowers, abide in His 
Own Eternal Joy, in concealment; such being His Pleasure, although the 
Lord was manifesting Himself in all these various ways yet He could not 
be recognized even by any of His Own servants. 

The Mothers of Sree Krishna serve the Lord as embodiments of the principle of 
pure reverential devotion like that of Devaki and Prisni, or by unmixed maternal 
affection like Yasoda and Sachi. The Mothers are not denied the transcendental 
un-alloyed service of Krishna although they are His superiors by relationship 
and are regarded as such by Krishna. It is the special privilege of the servants of 
Krishna to behold the manifestations of His Divine Power and Majesty. Sree 
Sachi Devi serves the Lord with greater devotion than His other servants. She 
loves Sree Gaursundar as her Son standing in constant need of her protecting 
affection. This is different from the purely reverential attitude of service. In this 
world parental affection precludes all element of the principle of service as 
practiced by an inferior. Even when the mother nurses her own child she cannot 
be supposed, without a jarring violation of all sense of propriety and truth, to be 
guided by a feeling of reverence for her own offspring. The two sentiments, as 
they are conceived in this world, are different and incompatible. In the Mothers 
of Krishna maternal affection perfects and incorporates, instead of excluding, the 
element of loyal servitude. There is no loss of any principle but only the growing 
excellence, by additional elements, of the one indivisible basic function which, 
inconceivably to us, gathers up all minute and nice distinctions that are found 
pervertedly reflected in the exclusive grades of mundane relationships. 

The most noticeable Feature of the Activities of Sree Gaursundar at this period, 
is Arrogance. He chose to carry the Pastime of His Arrogance to such 
lengths that there was at that time in the whole of Nabadwip no person who 
could beat Him in this respect. Commenting on this Thakur Brindavandas is led 
to observe that it is the peculiar and inalienable Characteristic of Krishna that He 
has no equal in whatever role He chooses to play and Sree Brindavandas 
Thakur proceeds to recapitulate the most notable instances of His Excesses. 
When the Lord chooses to indulge in the Pastime of fighting He excels all in the 
most perfect use of the weapons of warfare. When He wishes to indulge in 



amorous sports He effects the conquest of myriads of His sweethearts. When He 
desires to enjoy the pleasures of riches the homes of His servants are filled with 
the most profuse abundance of all precious jewels. When, at a subsequent 
period, this very Arrogant Gaursundar renounced the world and turned a 
Sarmyasin, a particle of His Renunciation was vainly to be looked for in all this 
triple universe. The truth of this Fact, says Thakur Brindavandas, writing of 
Events that were still fresh in the minds of all the people, is patent to all. 

The Renunciation of Sree Gaursundar is never possible in any other person. 

Those who represent Sree Gaursundar as engaged in amorous pastimes with His 
mistresses in the manner of His Activities of Dvapara Leela, commit 
an unpardonable offense against the canons of historical as well as 
spiritual propriety. It is directly opposed to the testimony of Sree Brindavandas 
Thakur who says clearly that at this period when Sree Gaursundar was exhibiting 
the Leela of a house-holder at Nabadwip He was, indeed, a most restless 
and mischievous Person Who was full of arrogance, but with one most 
significant reservation, viz., He altogether abstained then and throughout His 
Career from the society or discourse of women for indulgence in amorous 
pastimes as Enjoyer. He exhibited all along the role of the ideal servant of 
Krishna who is exclusively devoted to his Lord and absolutely free from any 
hankering for enjoyment on His Own Account. 

Certain sections of Sree Chaitanya’s professed followers, actuated by their 
worldly propensity, do not hesitate even from casting the aspersion of adulterous 
conduct on the perfectly abstemious Character of Sree Gaursundar. This willful 
and gross misrepresentation of a historical fact only shows the depths of the utter 
degradation to which the human nature is liable to fall by its efforts to 
comprehend the Doings of the Divinity under the dictates of its irrepressible 
hankering for sensuous enjoyment. It is for this reason that the contemplation of 
the conduct of the devotees of Krishna has been extolled by the Scriptures as 
being of greater help to souls striving for spiritual amelioration than even the 
Doings of the Lord Himself; because the Latter are liable to be wholly 
misunderstood by those who do not properly realize the supreme necessity of 
being instructed therein by the transcendental preceptor who leads the perfectly 
unworldly life and who is thereby enabled to have the right understanding of the 
Divine Activities of Sree Krishna Who is altogether unintelligible even to the 
candid worldly mind that pretends to seek for the real Truth. By such willful 
distortion of the Leela of Sree Gaursundar these insincere and thoughtless people 
only prevent themselves and others who are minded like themselves from 



realizing the true nature of the genuine devotee whom it was the object of Sree 
Gaursundar to make known to us by His Own Divine Conduct and Teaching. 
Unless and until we learn to follow the Teaching of Sree Gaursundar we can 
never realize the true Nature of the Activities of the Lord in His Avatara. in the 
different Ages by reference to their Source. 

For the same reason a conditioned soul must never try to ape the transcendental 
conduct of the servants of Krishna; because the activities of the unalloyed 
devotees cannot be understood except by their mercy, that is to say except by 
unconditional submission with body, mind and speech to the servant of the 
Absolute. It is not enough to have listened to the words of the devotee without 
submitting to be fully guided in our every act. On the transcendental plane there 
is no difference between idea and word and object denoted by them. This has to 
be realized not by persisting to differentiate between them while undergoing 
discipleship under a sadhu, but by submitting to realize them as an indivisible 
whole in our practice as well. So long as we actually retain an idea of our present 
disloyal conviction that they are separate from one another and that the Absolute 
Truth can be realized by merely exercising our intellect in the same way in 
which we find out the so-called truths of our worldly experience, we are doomed 
to deceive both ourselves and others by willfully and profanely confounding, 
against the imperative dictates of our own unalloyed reason, the material with 
the spiritual. Or, one may fall into deception of the opposite kind and ape the 
external conduct of a sadhu without caring to listen, with sufficient attention and 
with a serving disposition, to his words regarding Krishna. This will make one’s 
conduct a mechanical performance and also prevent the due realization of the 
momentous fact that on the plane of the Absolute there is no such thing as 
unintelligibility, i.e., absence of the fullest cognition. Every act of the servant of 
Krishna is instinct with all real cognitive significance, not in the imagined, 
figurative, or transferred but undivided absolute sense. The words of the sadhu 
have to be lived if one is sincerely willing to realize their true significance. 

Hence there arises the necessity of complete submission to the bona fide spiritual 
guide at all stages of spiritual endeavour. 

The Doings of Krishna are not cognisable even to His Own servants unless He is 
pleased to let them know The activities of Sree Gaursundar, although He exhibits 
the Leela of the devotee, are not intelligible to any person except by means of 
His special Grace vouchsafed through His servants. The Arrogance of Nimai 
Pandit deceived everybody in regard to His Real Nature. He appeared even to 
the Vaishnavas as an atheistical pedant whose only ambition was to acquire the 



reputation of the greatest scholar of His time. They confounded Him with those 
really egotistic pedants who abounded in Nabadwip and who were the worst 
enemies of the true religion inasmuch as in their role of teachers of the Religion 
they supported their impieties by the authority of the Holy Scriptures. They are 
the Putanas who abound in a controversial Age and it was necessary to stop their 
mouths if the Religion as not to be stifled at its birth. It is the Nature of Krishna 
to deal with everybody at his own weapons. He is the Servant of His servants 
and the Terror of His enemies. 

The Ideal Devotee of Krishna, Sree Gaursundar possessed by right of His 
Devotion all these Qualities of Krishna Himself. He was dealing with 
the atheistical teachers of religion on their own plane where alone, indeed, 
they could be met, although they did not deserve such aggressive mercy. But 
the Lord Himself must not, therefore, be supposed as belonging to their plane. 

By this conduct Sree Gaursundar was trying to help them in the only way 
that would be intelligible to them, viz., by proving the insufficiency of 
their polemics and thereby making it clear that they could not understand the 
real meaning of the Scriptures. 

The Pride and Arrogance of the Lord humbled even those proud and arrogant 
atheists who had grown hoary, in the practice of sophistry and were too bad to be 
reformed in any less violent way. This is the case of all empiricists, more or less, 
of this day or that. They really understand nothing, but always act as they know 
everything. They only submit to the sophist who is a greater juggler 
than themselves. Such polemical defeat serves to confirm them more strongly in 
the wisdom of their suicidal course. But if the art of the juggler is used not 
to confirm but rescue the juggler from his favourite self-deception such 
remedial jugglery is thereby raised to the level of the service of Krishna Who 
wishes to rescue all perverse souls by their own co-operating free choice. 

Sree Gaursundar set the example of such service in His Leela as ideal House¬ 
holder and Teacher. It is the duty of all scholars and teachers, if they want to be 
saved from self-deception and to prevent others from being deceived by their 
pedantic untruths, to accept unreservedly the service of the Absolute Truth as the 
only goal of their endeavours, and, when they find Him, to assert Him against 
all who parade such untruths as the medicine authorized by the scriptures of 
all the ills of our mortal estate. If this ideal of teachership were adopted it 
would really cure all distempers that the flesh is heir to, which can be healed by 
no other method. 



The distinctive feature of the Teaching of Sree Gaursundar is Causeless and 
Unbounded Mercy to all souls. The very Fullness of His Mercy stands in 
the way of the realization of its nature and specially by those pedantic 
worldlings who are proud of their own mis-supposed worth and are thereby led 
to prescribe their nostrums for the undoing of their unfortunate admirers. 

Those who mechanically follow the dictums of Vaishnavism or Revealed 
Religion, i.e., all Pharisees also necessarily fail to understand the supreme Mercy 
of Sree Gaursundar. Sree Gaursundar sets no value on conduct that is not 
inspired by unalloyed love for the Absolute. He teaches the function that breaks 
through all rules and conventions for the purpose of acting up to the 
Fountainhead of all rules and conventions. He sets His Face against all forms of 
self-complacency that is unduly vain of its laurels. The pure soul knows no 
inferior and has no taste for pedantic sophistry for procuring any worldly laurels. 
He strives under all circumstances, to realize the unconditional service of the 
Absolute. He has no selfish inclination and no suspicion that anything may not 
benefit himself. He knows spontaneously by his open-hearted experience of the 
Reality that to serve the Absolute in all manner and under all circumstances, is 
the only proper function. The service of the Absolute is capable of being realized 
and equally liable to be missed, under every form. Those who fix their attention 
on the external form, can never understand the behaviour of the real servants 
of the Absolute. No Pharisee can understand why Godhead sends the 
pouring showers of His Mercy on the just and the unjust. In this case the Nature 
of the Source from Whom the conduct proceeds, spiritualizes the whole act. 
Those who confound spirit with matter, the Absolute with the relative, 
cannot understand, due to want of candour, how that which is apparently 
opposed to their experience of this world, can be necessarily, True on the plane 
of the Absolute. But their stupidity happily does not abolish the Truth Himself. 
The arrogance of the Pharisee misjudges the quality of the Magnanimous 
Arrogance of Sree Gaursundar. This is the wholly deserved punishment of the 
hypocrite. It is the only method by which even the Pharisee is saved and those 
who are needlessly vain of their worldly virtues, are enlightened regarding their 
real function towards others. 

It is the Nature of Krishna to excel every entity in whatever He does, with a 
single exception. Krishna is always excelled by His devotee. One day the 
Lord happened to be passing along the public streets in the company of a number 
of His students who crowded on all sides of Him. The Lord was as richly 
dressed as a king. He was clad in a yellow robe, like Krishna. His Lips were 
dyed with the betel and His Holy Face had the splendour of a million Moons. All 



the people were praising Him. They said, 'He is verily the God of Love 
Himself Who has put on His Visible Body.’ On His Forehead shone the tilaka 
mark pointing upwards. His Beautiful Hands held His books. The Glance of His 
Lotus Eyes dispelled all sorrow. The Lord was coming along merrily, swinging 
His Arms, in the company of His students who were naturally of a most 
restless disposition. Sribas Pandit, fell in with Him on the way quite by accident 
and burst into laughter as he caught sight of the Lord. Nimai Pandit made 
obeisance to Sribas. The generous Sribas blessed Him by way of response 
saying, 'Live Thou for ever.’ Sribas then laughingly asked, ‘Whither goest Thou, 
Crest-jewel of the Arrogant? Why waste Thy. time in these vanities foregoing to 
serve Krishna? Why dost Thou teach Thy students so, night and day without 
respite? Why do people read at all? Is it not to learn devotion to Krishna? If that 
is not gained what does such learning avail? For this reason be well-advised not 
pass all Thy time in such vanity. Thou hast studied till now. It is high time for 
Thee to serve Krishna without delay? The Lord replied smiling, 'Be assured, 
revered Pandit, what you say will certainly come to pass by your grace? Saying 
this the Lord proceeded smiling to the bank of the Ganges and there re-joined the 
body of His pupils. 

Sribas Pandit, a Brahmana advanced in years, was accustomed to treat Sree 
Gaursundar in the manner of a superior and well wisher who regarded his junior 
as an object of his affectionate concern. Regarded from the point of view of 
reverential service such conduct towards Godhead must appear as improper. The 
same kind of objection would apply equally to Sandipani Muni, teacher 
of Krishna, to Garga Muni who was family-priest of the chief of Braja and, in 
Gaur-Leela, to Brahmananda Puri, co-disciple of Sree Isvara Puri. It is, however, 
a comparatively poor conception of our relationship with Krishna to suppose 
that it should be confined to distant reverence for the High and Mighty Godhead. 

The idea of the Absolute involved in the forms of reverential worship, is 
somewhat analogous to our conduct in this world where the sentiment 
of reverence precludes all really familiar intimacy. If a person who is situated 
on the plane of this world affects to conduct himself towards Krishna as 
towards his Chum or Junior he certainly perpetrates the grossest impropriety. 

The philanthropists (prakrita sahajiyas) pretend to think that it is possible to 
adopt the attitude of confidential intimacy found in this world towards Sree 
Krishna while we are in the sinful state in imaginary imitation of the similar 
feasible relationships of the absolute world without committing the 
grossest profanation. At the same time it would be no less untrue to suppose that 



the method of distant reverence itself is, therefore, the only or proper kind 
of service of the Divinity. 

The method of distant reverence is based on an incomplete view of the Absolute 
and does not therefore, belong to the highest plane. It is shy and diffident. It is 
also indicative of a certain reserve of love. Reverential service is of course not to 
be confounded with any form of hypocritical philanthropism. 

It is wholly free from all error of judgment and is bound to develop by directing 
its closer attention to its immature service of the Absolute. Contented reverential 
service, nevertheless, resembles that of the overjoyed traveler who builds his 
halfway house and prepares to settle down in it permanently under the 
impression that he has reached the goal. It is not easy to persuade such a traveler 
to resume his forward journey, especially if he has already built a solid structure 
and is supported by a strong body of admirers and colleagues of real purity of 
purpose. This is the form of service that is attainable in the Majestic Realm of 
Vaikuntha which supplies the ideal of the current religions. The latter are, 
however, really a veiled form of quasi-worldliness and often tantamounts to a 
religious refusal to seek the fullest service of the Absolute. Reverential worship 
especially in its degenerate forms, has proved the determined foe of all impartial 
and thorough inquiry in the domain of religion, no less effective than the pseudo 
authoritative methods that were once prevalent in the sphere of worldly 
knowledge. This unnatural form of worldliness aping the real service 
of Vaikuntha has been accepted as the only legitimate form of religion by 
all worldly persons who have been prepared to justify their practices by a sort 
of ridiculous assumption that religion is necessarily opposed to science, i.e., to 
the principle of free inquiry. But neither need the defects of the current forms 
of religious orthodoxy lead any but a deliberately foolish or wicked person to 
the serious conclusion that there is no such thing as the Absolute Truth 
Whose Admitted existence is certainly the only real obstacle in the way of 
all irresponsible free thinking so much affected by empiricists. 



Chapter 13 The Ideal Householder 


Professor Nimai used to stroll in the streets of the city in the company of His 
pupils. Men of the highest rank stepped down from their conveyances to accost 
Him as they came across Him on His way and made obeisance to His Feet with 
all humility. All persons felt an instinctive awe on meeting the Lord. There was 
none in the whole of Nabadwip who did not now unreservedly admit His pre¬ 
eminence as a scholar. Whenever a citizen performed any religious function he 
made it a point, as was the custom of the times, to send offerings of food and 
clothing to the House of the Lord. 

Householder Nimai Pandit was most open-handed in spending money. With 
Lordly Magnanimity He gave to the needy and the distressed unceasingly and 
without stint. Gaur-Hari thus gave away rice, clothing and money to the poor 
most generously whenever He chanced to meet them. There was a constant 
arrival of chance-guests at the House of the Lord. The Lord gave to all in the 
measure due to each. Sometimes a dozen or score of sannyasins would turn up 
all on a sudden. The Lord would joyfully invite them all to His House sending 
word to His mother for immediately providing the alms of cooked food for a 
score of sannyasins His mother was sometimes put to great perplexity for want 
of sufficient eatables in the House for meeting these peremptory demands or her 
Son. But such anxiety was always relieved by the automatic arrival of 
all requisites from unknown quarters. 

Lakshmi Devi would then cook the food most gladly and with special care. The 
Lord Personally watched Her cooking and Personally attended to the feeding 
of the sannyasins, never relaxing His attentions till their actual departure. 

He spared no pains to please His guests. The merciful Lord welcomed every 
chance-guest in this hospitable manner. The Supreme Lord taught all 
householders, by. His Own Example, their most distinctive function. ‘The 
principal duty of every householder,’ said the Lord, ‘is to serve all his chance- 
guests. I call that person even worse than birds and beasts who, being a 
householder, does not serve his chance-guests. If one happens to be destitute of 
every necessary by reason of ill-luck due to his previous bad deeds, he should 
still gladly spread for the chance-guest some straw as a seat, and offer him water 
and resting ground. No good man can be without these. Let such a person speak 
out truly and let him express his regret for not being able to do more. Such loyal 
conduct would save him from the terrible offense of inhospitality. If one serves 



sincerely and with a glad heart according to his means his proper duty to his 
chance-guest is thereby duly performed., Thus taught Sree Gaursundar and His 
Own Conduct bears out His Teaching. 

Thakur Brindabandas, commenting on the above, observes that those chance- 
guests to whom Lakshmi and Narayana made the gift of their food, 
were certainly most fortunate. Even Brahma himself and his following always 
pin their hopes of deliverance on food from the Hands of the Lord Himself. 

This supremely coveted food was obtained by any and every chance comer. It 
was truly most wonderful! There are those who opine otherwise. These 
maintain that no lesser beings are ever in any way eligible to be recipients of 
such food; and the Brahma, Siva, Suka, Vyasa, Narada, and the head of all the 
gods, all the self-realized souls and all eternally free souls came thither in the 
forms of mendicants, apprised of the Appearance of Lakshmi and Narayana 
at Nabadwip. Otherwise who else have power to be there? Who else but 
Brahma and those who are on a level with him, can ever be fit to obtain that 
food? Others, however, hold that the Descent of the Lord into this world was for 
the Purpose of delivering all the miserable. The Lord ever relieves the distressed 
in every way. Brahma and the other gods are His own limbs, and the limbs 
of those limbs. They are ever and in every way the associates of the Lord. 

But there is His Own special promise regarding this particular Appearance, ‘I 
will give alljivas what is attainable with difficulty by Brahma and his peers? It 
is for this reason that the Lord offered His food at His own House to all 
the distressed. 

Charity to the poor and unstinted hospitality to all chance guests are 
recommended by the Scriptures as the principle duty of all householders. 

The Varnashrama system permits a person to marry, set up as a householder 

and pursue an honest trade or profession for earning his livelihood. But 

no householder must cook any food for his own consumption. He must 

always cook only for the Lord. Neither should he amass wealth for the livelihood 

of himself and his family. He may accumulate wealth in order to relieve 

the distressed and for performing the duty of unstinted hospitality to all chance- 

guests. 

Miserliness is unreservedly condemned. A Brahmana, i.e., one who sincerely 
professes to lead a regulated spiritual life, is distinguished by this quality 
of liberality in the spending of his wealth. He must be perfectly open-handed. It 
is his nature and also his duty, to employ his wealth for relieving distress. It is 



his duty to give liberally food, clothing and money. It is also his duty to serve 
and accumulate a certain amount of wealth for this purpose. It is his duty to 
give with an easy mind. There is no higher duty for a householder than this. 

This is clearly opposed to the ideal of the worldly economists who favour the 
method of niggardly ‘doles, for relieving ( ?) distress. Indiscriminate or 
lavish charity is considered by the Economists as harmful both to the giver and 
the recipient of such charity. The recipient of indiscriminate charity is supposed 
to be encouraged thereby to lead the idle life of a parasite. The giver of 
such charity is accordingly supposed to be a conscious or an unconscious abettor 
of unprincipled idleness. It is, therefore, supposed to be the duty of a 
householder not to countenance any form of begging. That form of charity alone 
is permitted by the Economists which is exercised for helping people to lead 
an industrious life. This discrimination is strongly inculcated by all 
modern Economists. But Sree Chaitanya makes no reservation in regard to 
hospitality to chance-guests. 

As a matter of fact the charitable disposition itself assorts ill with the principle of 
discrimination. Is a professional beggar really a great nuisance as he is ordinarily 
supposed to be by the Economists? He is the inevitable product of the practice 
recommended by the uncharitable Economist. He is the natural and salutary (?) 
check on the social triumph of undiluted industrialism. Would the world be an 
ideal place if it be inhabited solely by uncharitable, rich misers? Is not 
miserliness after all quite definitely and logically traceable to the same selfish 
instinct that produces the professional beggar at the other end? Those who 
discourage indiscriminate charity indirectly encourage miserliness by 
their deprecation of the vice of improvidence. The economic view cannot be 
free from this grave defect. 

The real danger of all those who live to eat, is due to their besetting desire for the 
cultivation of undiluted selfishness. This latter is the root-cause of all economic 
and other troubles of this world. It is, therefore, necessary to insist that the 
householder must give up the ideal of calculated selfishness if he is to be really 
at peace with himself and the world. The miser need not suppose that he is a 
better man than the beggar. Both of them are in equal danger of becoming selfish 
by, the avoidance of their duty by one another. The householder can be cured of 
his selfishness not by so-called discriminate or no charity, but only by true 
magnanimity. 



Those who advocate saving in order to increase the capital of a country only 
extend the application of the principle of exclusive selfishness to the sphere of 
national economy with its corresponding disastrous result. A nation which lives 
only to eat, is no better than the uncharitable householder whose case has been 
considered above. The bubble of the fashionable capitalistic theory will be 
pricked, and is in course of being pricked, by the rival principle of unselfish 
brotherly co-operation, for multiplying the so-called necessaries and luxuries, for 
a higher purpose than that of selfish enjoyment by the nation or the individual. 
That higher purpose is unreserved service of Godhead, which, however, cannot 
be understood by those who are too exclusively absorbed in the pursuit of the 
alternative lines of the selfish ideal. 

But it may be urged that the ideal of unselfish living sketched above, has also its 
danger. An unselfish individual and nation are liable to be exploited by 
the selfish. This is no doubt true. But is it really harmful to any party? 

The ,varnashrama system was never properly followed in this country. It is 
bound to be recognized as the best social arrangement possible in this world, and 
as the only one that offers the least opposition to the goal of spiritual living. 

The special hospitality shown by Sree Gaursundar to sannyasins points to a 
spiritual duty on the part of the householder who aims at the attainment of a 
higher than the merely economic plane of living. By the practice of open-door 
hospitality alone the householder is brought into proper touch with those who 
keep up the ideal of spiritual service of the Lord in the form that is least likely to 
be misunderstood by the economic householder. 

The institution of asceticism (sannyasa) is the distinguishing feature of the 
varnashrama system. It is the fourth stage in the life of a person belonging to the 
system; the other three being Brahmacharya (period of spiritual 
training), Garhastya (householder life) and Vanaprastha (period of retirement 
from domestic life). The Yati or sannyasin does not cook for himself. He may 
accept food cooked by the twice-born, who, being worshippers of Vishnu, cook 
only for the Lord. No articles of food may be offered to Vishnu that may cause 
pain to any sentient being or stimulate animal passion. Hence there should be 
no objection on the part of sannyasins to accept food cooked by 
Brahmana householders. 

But no sannyasin may settle down at any place other than the Abode of the Lord. 
A sannyasin must continuously move from place to place for the benefit of those 



who lead a stationary life. A sannyasin has no other purpose than to serve the 
Pleasure of Vishnu. He is the Guru or spiritual Guide of all persons belonging to 
the other three stages. It is the duty of every householder to hospitably receive 
him with the greatest honor. It is the duty of the householder to offer his best 
hospitality to the sannyasin who is always a chance-guest. It is also his duty to 
receive the sannyasins with the greatest honour that is due to the order of the 
spiritual teachers of society. 

The sannyasin is the chance-guest whom Sree Gaursundar specifically teaches 
all householders as in duty bound to honour, according to the varnashrama 
system no person is to be permitted to live for himself. The professional beggars 
are no exception to this rule. But neither the professional beggar nor the self- 
centered householder is a fit member of the society that is organized for serving 
the spiritual end although they are tolerated and given the chance of 
improvement by the generous provision of the system. The loyal members of the 
system never live unto themselves and are therefore, neither selfish householders 
nor professional beggars; although all householders are required by the system to 
tolerate and cherish even disloyal persons for the purpose of mutual 
improvement. 

The professional beggar and miserly householder necessarily claim the lion’s 
share of hospitality of every loyal household in a society in which they happen to 
form the majority of members. It is not laid down in the Shastras that there is 
any obligatory duty of hospitality toward those guests who insist on staying at a 
place for more than a single day at a time. From this provision it appears that the 
obligatory duty of householders towards chance-guests really refers to the 
sannyasins. The poor and the distressed are also mentioned in the Shastras as 
objects of charity. But it is carefully laid down that charitable gifts to such 
persons would benefit the giver and the receiver in the worldly sense only. But 
the hospitality to the chance-guest is recommended on the ground that 
it produces spiritual benefit to the householder without the necessity of 
his having to try to find out sadhus by undertaking journeys that are also 
enjoined to holy places where only the sadhus are to be ordinarily met with. 
Every householder was provided by means of such organized hospitality with 
the opportunity of spiritual communion with the sadhus coming to his door 
by serving them for his own benefit. In this duty all members of his family 
could also participate and be benefited thereby. It is not merely social benefit 
which would be secured by this practice, but an inclination for the spiritual 
service of the Lord without which no so-called social good is worth a brass 



farthing. 


The institution of sannyasins is, of course, also liable to degenerate. Those 
sannyasin who do not serve the Lord are even worse than mere professional 
beggars. There has been an enormous increase of both species of beggars, as is 
to be expected in this world. But those professional beggars who pass 
themselves off as sannyasins in order to exploit the religious homage of the good 
householders, are also liable to be benefited by having to conform to the rules of 
the order which require every sannyasin to keep aloof from all association with 
the other sex and strictly discourage all accumulation of wealth, fixity of 
habitation and luxurious living. Those professional beggars with the garb of 
sannyasins who observe none of these rules, should be regarded as mere 
scoundrels who must not certainly be honoured as the spiritual teachers of the 
community. But it should be possible for every householder, with a clear 
realization of the true principles of the varnashrama system, to practice unstinted 
charity and good will towards all persons in the measure that is due to each. But 
the claim of pseudo-sannyasins, to be the authorized spiritual teachers of the 
community, should not also be seriously entertained on any Shastric principle. 
They may be sent away with kind words and outward respect due to their garb 
and may be given the bare necessaries of life of which they may actually stand in 
need. 

There is, however, another and a higher aspect of the matter. Sree Gaursundar 
was playing the part of a devotee in the position of a householder. Those who 
were the recipients of the favour of His hospitality were undoubtedly most 
fortunate. Who then could be those who are really worthy of such high fortune. 
Do Brahma and other great beings on a level with Brahma stand in need of such 
favour ? Even they, say the Scriptures, fail to attain the supreme mercy of such 
favour. Judged by the test of eligibility, however, they ought to have a 
preferential claim to such favour. So it is maintained by those who take this view 
that the Householder Leela of the Supreme Lord, acting the part of the ideal 
devotee, was intended for favouring Brahma and other great personages, who 
availed the opportunity by presenting themselves in the garb of chance-guests 
and beggars in distress. 

Food, clothing, rice, a seat, anything offered by the Lord has power to benefit 
everyone in the fullest measure. Brahma and other great beings are 
no exceptions to the rule. There call be no true greatness save by the Favour of 
the Lord. One who attains such greatness by Divine Grace is enabled to 



realize more and more the infinite mercy involved in the eternal necessity of 
having to be the recipients of the Divine Favour. Unless the Lord is pleased by 
one’s activity it has no value whatsoever. Its contribution to the Pleasure of the 
Lord constitutes the sole and supreme value of all activity for the lowest of jivas, 
as for the highest. Those who want to serve the Lord without desiring to 
be favoured, have a very poor idea of spiritual service. It is by all means the 
only natural function of the soul to desire the Divine Favour in every way. It 
is unnatural for the soul to desire any favour from any other quarter. Those 
who have no hankering for the Divine Favour, can have no experience of His 
Real Nature. This fatal stupor is curable only by the Causeless Mercy of the 
Lord which is apparently unnecessarily and indiscriminately, showered on all. 
Those jivas who fail to be reclaimed by the Divine Favour, have equal reason to 
be grateful to the Supreme Lord Who mercifully permits the fullest liberty 
of choice to all souls even against His own perfectly beneficent Dispensation. 

It was, therefore, no departure from the principle of absolute causelessness of the 
manifestation of Divine Mercy, but really the most brilliant fulfillment, that is 
noticeable in the Activities of the Supreme Lord as Householder, in bestowing, 
His Favour, coveted by Brahma, Siva, and all highest 
personages, indiscriminately on all. This Conduct of the Supreme Lord also 
places before us, in true amplitude, the incalculable range of the beneficence of 
the activities of the bona fide Vaishnava householder. The Lord’s purpose was to 
vindicate the function of His devotee. The favour of His devotee is superior in 
the quality of graciousness even to that of the Lord Himself. The devotee is 
eternally engaged in doing good, of which the recipients are unconscious, to 
those fallen souls who are deliberately opposed to the willing service of the 
Lord. This unsolicited favour from His devotee is the sole unknown cause of 
eligibility for the conscious and willing service of the Lord that is slowly 
manifested in all conditioned souls who are thus favoured. Rice, clothing and 
money which conditioned souls readily accept from the Vaishnava householder 
under the merciful pressure of destitution or even from the desire to beg by 
assuming the garb of a spiritual mendicant, possess the power of healing our 
aversion to the Lord that is equal to that of the direct Mercy vouchsafed by the 
Lord Himself to conscious and grateful recipients. 

Everything possessed by a Vaishnava householder belongs wholly- to the Lord 
in the special sense that the devotee is fully conscious of the sole proprietorship 
of the Lord and is also eligible to act up to his conviction. His charity is, 
therefore, to be distinguished from that of one who usurps a thing by the right of 



pseudo-proprietorship. Whatever is therefore, accepted, given away or retained 
by the true devotee, is done on behalf of the Lord and, therefore, possesses the 
spiritual quality, imparted to an object due to its spiritual dedication to the 
service of the Lord, viz., that of delivering those concerned in the same from the 
bondage of this world. The food that is offered by the devotee to the Lord is 
called maha prasadam after acceptance by the Lord. 

Those who accept maha prasadam thereby consciously or unconsciously 
progress towards the activity of spiritual service. The remainder of the 
maha prasadam, after being honoured by the devotee, is termed- 
maha,prasadam, who possesses even greater efficacy than the prasadam as he 
produces faith in the spiritual nature of the devotee. All this is implied in the 
Hospitable Activities of the Lord acting the part of a Vaishnava householder. 

If any trace of doubt is still left in the minds as regards the necessity of a 
Vaishnava householder serving Vaishnava sarmyasins arriving at his house 
as chance-guests, it may be observed that the Vaishnava householder does 
not aspire to favour, help or benefit any body but serves all persons with whom 
he has any dealings. One who fancies himself to be a Vaishnava is a hypocrite. 
The Vaishnava is really and fully aware of his inferiority to every other entity; all 
of whom are viewed by him as objects engaged in the service of the Lord who 
are to be honoured as properties and servants of his Master. The devotee alone 
is, therefore, fully eligible for consciously serving the Vaishnava sarmyasins 
and understands the real value of their mercy in visiting unsolicited the homes 
of householders under the Direction of the Lord, in order to afford them 
an opportunity of serving the Lord in the best manner by showing hospitality 
to themselves. This function of hospitality is capable of being fully 
discharged only by the Vaishnava-householder who is in a position to understand 
its necessity and high value for all concerned. 

From the point of view of the householder the spiritual value of the obligatory 
duty of hospitality to all chance-guests consists in its being the necessary 
supplement of the begging and peripatetic guiding function of the sannyasins. 
The value of such hospitality increases in proportion as its significance is 
realized and embodied in the act. The external activity is liable to be abused by 
the misconception of its real nature. But the abrogation of the duty which is so 
emphatically and clearly enjoined by the Shastras on all householders involves 
the fatal danger of breeding disbelief in the spiritual principle. One, who is really 
anxious to find out the duty of a householder, should be careful to avoid the 



mistakes of supposing it to be a merely mechanical activity on the one hand or as 
the product of designing hypocrisy or ignorant simplicity on the other. The 
householder should exercise his hospitality discriminately and must always pay 
due attention to the spiritual import. The modern institutions of public 
almshouses, hospitals and other charitable organizations err by trying to remove 
only the worldly miseries and wants of those whom they desire to serve. The 
husk is ostentatiously dangled before the greedy imaginations of self-deluded 
souls who are deliberately disposed to prefer it to the grain which tastes bitter to 
their diseased palates. These institutions, if they are to do the maximum good to 
mankind, should change their principles of management and objective by 
subordinating unconditionally the worldly point of view to the spiritual. The 
present discriminating worldly charity which they dispense, should give place 
to indiscriminate spiritual charity. This applies equally to individual 
householders who make a show of benefitting the needy and the destitute and 
other chance guests by practicing covert arrogance in the name of serving 
hospitality. To the purely worldly understanding, the product and the punishment 
of egotistic vanity which is the proper negation of the principle of spiritual 
service, these considerations are unfortunately apt to seem visionary and 
unpractical. Those who deliberately choose to regard the perverted reflection as 
being itself the substance of which it really happens to be the shadow, have no 
other alternative but to continue to behave perversely. 

Lakshmi Devi cooked the meals of the family by. Herself, unassisted, and yet 
experienced the greatest happiness in the performance of this duty. 

Most fortunate mother Sachi, watching this Behaviour of Lakshmi, felt a great 
and hourly increase of her gladness. From early dawn Lakshmi performed all the 
duties of the household alone by Herself. This was Her Nature, or Religion. She 
drew the circles of the svastika in the shrine for Godhead and the figures of the 
Conch and the Disc with great care. She made every preparation for the worship 
of the Lord by perfumes, flowers, incense, lighted lamp and well-scented water. 
She constantly served the tulasi and applied Her Mind, with even greater 
assiduity, to the service of Sachi Devi. 

By observing this Conduct of Lakshmi Sree Gaursundar did not say anything 
openly but felt glad at Heart. On some days, taking into Her Arms the Feet of the 
Lord, Lakshmi Devi would continue to tend Them for a while. Once Sachi had a 
most wonderful vision. She saw a most brilliant massive tongue of fire burning 
under the Feet of her Son. On some days mother Sachi scented a great perfume 



of the lotus flower everywhere about the rooms, doors and windows, that also 
never ceased. Thus at Nabadwip abode Lakshmi and Narayana hiding 
Themselves and so no one could know. Then, after sometime had passed in this 
manner, the Lord, Who is ever full of every wish, had a desire of beholding the 
country of East Bengal. The Lord thereupon spoke to His mother to the effect 
that He intended to go out of Home for a few days. Sree Gaursundar said to 
Lakshmi to serve the mother unceasingly. Thereafter the Lord, taking with Him a 
few favored students, started for East Bengal, with great Pleasure. 

In the above paragraph I have tried to reproduce the words of Sree Brindabandas 
Thakur. They afford a glimpse into the ideal of the relationship of the loyal wife 
to her God-fearing husband in this world. Sree Lakshmi Devi is the ideal servant 
of Her Husband’s Household. There is no one else to assist her. Mother Sachi as 
well as Sree Gaursundar are recipients of Her help. She occupies the 
unconditional subordinate position. There is no question of equality of status or 
function. Her duties lie within the household and are not shared by Her Husband 
or mother-in-law. Her principal work is to make careful arrangements for the 
worship of Vishnu, decorate His shrine by drawing the figures that are 
emblematic of the Powers of the Lord, tend the tulasi and attend constantly on 
Sachi Devi. She cooks and serves the meals offered by the family to Godhead. 
She tends the Feet of Sree Gaursundar. She works from early dawn till late at 
night. She does all this with a perfectly loyal and glad heart. 

This is no doubt wholly opposed to worldly ideas regarding the proper position 
of the wife in the household of her husband. It appeals to neither the 
mundane intellect nor to the mundane connubial sentiment. The life seems to be 
too mechanical, too narrow and too much subordinated. It does not at all 
provide for the bodily and mental comforts of the wife. It severely curtails the 
sphere of her activities to the inside of the house of her husband. There is no 
variety of work, no provision for leisure or other recreation. There is strangely 
enough little reference to the sexual conjugal love. It may not be unnaturally 
supposed-that all this may be convenient from the point of view of the elders but 
are not likely to be relished either by the husband or, least of all, by the over 
worked wife herself who is crushed by a system of sheer, joyless, purposeless 
slavery which can only make her gradually lose even the energy of making any 
piteous protests. The mother-in-law is the standing dread of a worldly wife 
who considers it physically impossible to please superimposed elderly mistress 
at her elbow whose tastes are bound to differ radically from hers. 



The difference between willing rational service and slavery is real and need not 
be overlooked. If one submits to another from a sense of duty and in 
pursuance of a rational object such submission becomes necessarily 
differentiated from slavery. The quantity or nature of the work that may be 
performed is no proof of its slavish character. What should be the proper object 
of every household? The atheistic conception seems to be that the household is 
the product of the sensuous outlook and its object is to satisfy our mundane 
cravings in an effective manner. Work and leisure according to such view, should 
be so arranged that no undue excess of either may produce harmful bodily or 
mental discomfort. Liberty of choice in the selection of work and the method of 
its performance is regarded as the keystone of the arch of social and 
domestic felicity; although the danger of anarchy in both domestic and 
social government is also admitted. The two objectives of the household system 
of this democratic Age of equality are maximum personal liberty and 
maximum personal comfort of every inmate. The outlook is of course worldly. 
Those who are disposed to defend the system of purdah and subordination of the 
wife to her husband, do so because they believe that the worldly ends are likely 
to be better served by the adoption of those methods. 

As a matter of fact inequality in work, temperament and ability are hard facts of 
our everyday experience, that cannot be abolished by simply overlooking 
their existence from a conviction of the sheer impossibility of harmonizing all 
discordant differences. If the object of the household institution be to secure the 
maximum possible worldly enjoyment for every member, it is not possible to 
devise any arrangement by which this is really attainable. The full cup 
of domestic happiness is liable to be dashed in an instant by a solitary whisper 
and the mischief cannot be healed by the shibboleths of liberty and equality, or 
by the elaborate cunning of a complicated worldliness. The worldly end in itself 
is the Tantalu’s Cup and it gives its deluding character to all the details of 
the system. It is the worldly end which really destroys the peace of the 
household and is bound to prevent the attainment of any really satisfactory 
result. 

The sole object of the household institution should be to serve the Supreme Lord 
if it is the purpose to produce real peace and harmony, possible only by spiritual 
association. Neither the wife nor any other member should aim at personal 
comfort, nor should be encouraged to do so. But it is not possible to instill into 
any individual member the principle of unselfishness unless the same forms also 
the accepted principle of all members of the household, the service of the 



Supreme Lord alone can impress upon all unselfish persons, the necessity and 
desirability of its adoption as the only unconditional common function of all 
members of every household. 

The Supreme Lord can be served only if He happens to be a person essentially 
like overselves if He condecends to receive our service. But it does not 
remove all difficulties, although it establishes the reality, of the serving function. 

If the service of the Lord resembles the so-called service that is ordinarily 
offered to a human being the difficulties connected with the latter will recur 
in the proposed function. A human being normally desires the satisfaction of 
his personal needs and is prepared to do willingly what promises such 
satisfaction. The only difficulty in this case is that he does not know what can 
actually satisfy him. He is constantly in search of such satisfaction by the 
adoption of the available defective methods, due to his natural want of judgment 
and capacity. It is for this reason that he is doomed to suffer from 
perpetual dissatisfaction. Moreover, there is no reasonable guarantee that the 
methods adopted by him, for the unattainable ideal of complete personal 
satisfaction of Himself as a human being, will be, in every case, promotive of the 
similar satisfaction of those whose services he must require for his purpose. 

This uncertaintv in regard to both is reflected in the modern democratic cry 
of liberty and equality, showing that those interests have not been served by 
the unchecked pursuit of selfish happiness by each individual human 
being, however high the individualistic ideal may be regarded to be in the 
abstract. But the proposed democratic method has also its own defects. It quite 
unnaturally ignores all real differences of capacity, taste and character of the 
individuals. No lasting habitable structure can be expected to be built on 
radically unnatural and fallacious assumptions. The attempt is bound to produce 
fresh causes of discord and disappointment. 

The common service of the Supreme Lord should be acceptable if it be really 
free from the above defects and thus ensure the attainment of the 
maximum satisfaction of the individual and the community. Vishnu is the Only 
Person Whose Plans for His Own Personal Satisfaction are ever productive of 
a perennial variety of conditions of the highest and lasting general and 
individual satisfactions of all jivas. The Pians of Vishnu benefit everybody, even 
those who wilfully abstain from receiving the benefit from a deliberate 
misunderstanding of the Nature of the Divine Personality. The atheists are 
mistaken in being afraid of losing their independence of action if they have to 



unconditionally obey the Lord. If they have no rational objection to 
unconditionally obeying their own real nature they can have none to obeying the 
Lord. By obeying the Lord all souls are enabled to attain the complete natural 
function of their own proper selves. By disobeying Him the soul ceases to find 
either himself or his function. This is proved indirectly by the futility of every 
effort to institute the perfect household by the misguided soul’s own independent 
effort, by ignoring his natural relationship to his Lord. The service of the Lord is 
the source of all knowledge, all existence and all satisfaction of all souls. If we 
do not submit to serve Him we naturally grope in utter darkness by mistaking 
darkness for light. The object of every endeavour of every soul should be to seek 
for the Divine Guidance if he really wants to attain his complete normal 
existence. The service of the Lord should, therefore, be the only legitimate 
object of all household and social institutions. 

In the Household of Sree Gaursundar every function was performed for pleasing 
the Supreme Lord. The practice of conjugal love is one of the most coveted 
objects of worldly life. It is also liable to degenerate into an abnormality due to 
the sensual nature of depraved man who is impelled by lust to deceive, himself 
in regard to his sexual responsibilities. Marriage is a failure if it be regarded as a 
means of satisfying one’s carnal appetites. The wedded husband and wife should 
not be less free from the offense of sexuality than the bachelor. They marry with 
the object of attaining perfect immunity from carnality by adopting the regulated 
conjugal life that leads to this spiritual result. Such conduct for such purpose is 
practiced in the service of the Supreme Lord. But this natural function can also 
be neither learnt nor practiced except under spiritual guidance. The unassisted 
mentality of tiny individual souls does not enable them to realize their own 
supreme good. The rationality of the reason of man can itself be realized only by 
being rationalized by the All-knowledge and by consciously sharing in serving 
His Cosmic Plan. It is only in this way that one can escape the tyranny of his 
own native littleness. 

Religion is not a departmental affair, nor the special business of any particular 
set of people. It is the practice of the service of the Truth in all affairs. But 
the Truth cannot be fully served by the limited cognition of the conditioned 
soul. The Truth in His Proper Nature is always Full and Immutable and is 
known only to the Supreme Soul Who has also the power to Communicate 
Himself to the multitude of individual souls. The Truth cannot be known if one 
acts in opposition to the source of rationality. 



Conduct which is irrational is also improper and unnatural for a rational being. 
There can be no other test of impropriety. All conduct, therefore, ceases to 
be rational as soon as it neglects to receive inspiration from the Source of 
all knowledge. No act can be irrational or undesirable that is done in 
conscious obedience to the Will of the Absolute. The domestic duties of the loyal 
wife cease to be drudgery and slavishness if they are performed in conformity 
with the Wishes of the Supreme Lord. The leisure, liberty and comforts of 
the worldly wife are the means of confirming her taste for dissipations that 
are bound to react in a most mischievous manner on her real self and on the 
souls of her aiders and abettors. 

The service of the Lord, Who is perfectly free from all defects, is the only 
natural function of the pure cognitive essence of the free soul. In every work that 
a truly rational being undertakes there can be only one object, viz., to realize and 
carry out the Wishes of Godhead. The Conduct of Sree Lakshmi Devi belongs to 
the plane of the unconditional loving service of the Lord. The unity and concord 
of the household are fully secured by the willing and indefatigable exertions of 
the loyal God-fearing wife, and, at the same time, the only function of a 
perfectly rational existence in the form of the practice of loving devotion of 
Godhead is realized for herself by the service of those who thus employ her in 
their service of Godhead. If Sachi Devi had any desire for selfish enjoyment she 
would have failed to have such high regard for her Daughter-in-law. She 
accepted the services rendered to her by Sree Lakshmi Devi in the spirit in which 
they were rendered, viz., in order to honour her Divine Husband’s mother who 
possessed the spontaneous absorbing serving affection for her Divine Son. Sree 
Lakshmi Devi loved her Husband on the plane that is absolutely free from all 
mundane passions attainable to one who is wholly dedicated to the service of the 
Lord. The Lord responded to Her serving love by pursuing the Role of the ideal 
Devotee Who serves Krishna with all his faculties. But at the bottom of it all lay 
Her actual relationship with the Divine Personality, the fulfillment of Whose 
Wishes tantamounts to the successful performance of one’s whole duty. 

The work of a menial is looked down upon, but it can never be banished from 
this world. It is similarly easy enough to sneer at the loyal wife who sets 
herself with perfect satisfaction to the exclusive performance of ordinary 
domestic duties. But the food cooked by Sree Lakshmi Devi is accepted by the 
Lord and benefits all who partake of the remains of the Lord’s Meal. The rich 
food cooked by atheists may minister to the pleasures of the palate of an 
Epicurean, but is never the Great Grace (maha prasadam) of the Lord that the 



other is. The humblest work that is performed for the Lord has the greatest 
potency and more than fully satisfies the utmost needs of all the faculties of our 
souls, because it is most fully free and rational. This makes spiritual conduct 
eternally different from the worldly and absolutely unintelligible to all 
worldlings. 

The personal subordination of the wife to the good husband makes her the 
mistress of the household in the sense that she is thereby enabled to have 
the right of serving every member in the way that is in keeping with the 
spiritual purpose. If she aspires to be the mistress in the sense of being allowed 
the right to lord it over the household, her position from the spiritual point of 
view would be worse than useless, inasmuch as she would altogether cease to 
render any service to the Lord. On the spiritual plane the only admissible 
position for the soul is that of the servant of servants. In such case, however, 
neither the wife nor the husband is really servant or master of one another. Both 
are servants and servants of the servants of their common and only Lord. 

Any difference in the nature of their respective forms of service does not affect 
their natural status of exclusive servants of the Lord. Failure of duty towards 
the Lord would result if either party misunderstands his or her real status 
as servant of the Lord. Those who suppose that any authority can be exercised 
by any of us by the right of selfish enjoyment (the worldly sense of 
mastership), are thereby led to quarrel about precedence and status. In the 
spiritual institution of the household precedence is accorded to the female over 
the male in the service of the servant of the Lord. The wife is truly honoured 
above all other members in this way. This is the Divine Dispensation and is 
intended to curb the vanity of mastership and mistressship that are inborn to 
the conditioned state which is disposed to exploit the difference of sex for 
selfish enjoyment. There would thus be no difficulty if we regard the 
arrangement enjoined by the Shastras from the point of view of our mutual 
service to our common and only Master. 

The personal service which was rendered by Sree Lakshmi Devi to Her Husband 
may be objected to by those females who are unduly addicted to sensuous 
enjoyment under the impression that it is the goal of all human endeavour. Such 
persons may be disposed to think that the life led by Sree Lakshmi Devi was too 
formal or too respectful or wanting in the qualities of sympathy and affection. 
But everyone will easily perceive the exquisite propriety of Her Conduct as 
being in perfect conformity with the requirements of the very highest spiritual 
service. 



This brings us to an important issue. The relationship of sensuous enjoyment is 
wholly forbidden to the conditioned soul although it alone necessarily appears to 
him or her as the one thing needful. In place of such relationship, which prevails 
in this world, and which is the root cause of all troubles of conditioned souls, is 
to be substituted the relationship of common service of the Supreme Lord by the 
employment of the senses not for the gratification of one another but for the sole 
satisfaction of their only legitimate Enjoyer. This institution of marriage is 
intended to lead to the realization of this relationship of spiritual service in the 
matter of sexual conduct. This is realized by honestly following the injunctions 
of the Shastras against the natural dictates of our worldly inclination. Enjoyment 
is the right reserved for the Supreme Lord, because He alone is the only Master. 
He alone possesses real authority over all persons and its exercise also does not, 
for this reason, involve any untoward consequences. The true rational order of 
spiritual cosmos is set at naught by the unnatural proprietary ambitions of 
conditioned souls, who are by their spiritual nature, servants of every spiritual 
entity and can never be the Lords of any entity because every entity including 
themselves, is the exclusive servant of the Supreme Lord. 

The failure to realize the spiritual import of the Conduct of Sree Lakshmi Devi is 
responsible for the sexual excesses that are sometimes practiced under the garb 
of following loyally the conduct of Sree Gaursundar as Householder. 

Sree Gaursundar was pleased with the Conduct of Sree Lakshmi Devi because it 
was in accordance with His Own Purpose and showed His Pleasure by 
commanding Her to serve Sree Sachi Devi during His sojourn in East Bengal. 
Sree Gaursundar did not reward the loyal service of Sree Lakshmi Devi by 
relaxing His strictly regulated Conduct towards Her, but by giving Her 
further opportunities of service of a higher order. The service of the servant of 
the Lord is higher than the direct service of the Lord Himself. Whenever the 
Supreme Lord is-pleased with the devoted service of a soul He shows His 
appreciation of such devotion by conferring on him the higher privilege of 
serving His servants. The mother of Sree Gaursundar serves the Lord, by the 
practice of parental affection. Sree Lakshmi Devi and Sree Tulasi Devi also 
serve the Lord by their respective aptitudes as consort and maid. Sree Lakshmi 
Devi also served Sree Tulasi. She now gave Her whole service to Sree Sachi 
Devi. It was no disrespect to Sree Tulasi Devi on the part of Sree Lakshmi Devi 
to prefer the service of Sree Sachi Devi to that of Sree Tulasi, inasmuch as Sree 
Tulasi occupies a position of inferiority to the Mother of Godhead in the scale of 
reverence. As a matter of fact, however, the apparent indifference shown to the 
service of Sree Tulasi by Sree Lakshmi Devi in comparison with her reverential 



and constant attendance on Sree Sachi Devi, was the better way of serving also 
Sree Tulasi. 

The Activities of Sree Gaursundar are, however, not fully grasped in all their 
surpassing excellence unless we remember the cardinal fact that He is 
actually the Supreme Lord Himself. Sree Lakshmi Devi is the Eternal Consort of 
the Supreme Lord. The inexpressible Mercy of these Activities of the Divine 
Pair consists in this; that They play the roles of jiva souls, endeavouring to 
practice the exclusive service of the Lord in this world. The Lord does not 
appear in His Role of Enjoyer, lest He be misunderstood. But we are so grossly 
addicted to sensuous enjoyment that there Are not wanting persons among us 
who have not scrupled to seek to detect the presence of mundane sensuous 
propensity even in this wonderfully transparent and unambiguous Behaviour of 
Sree Gaurundar towards Sree Lakshmi Devi. 

Sree Thakur Brindabandas dwells lovingly on the incidents of the sojourn of the 
Lord in Eastern Bengal in the company of His students. The Lord progressed 
in His journey to East Bengal by slow stages. No one, who had the good fortune 
of witnessing the Lord on His journey could take away his eyes from Him. 

Females on catching Sight of the Lord expressed the opinion that it is really 
worth while for the Mother Whose Son is He to have been born at all. Let 
us therefore, do humble obeisance to the Feet of His Mother. That Maiden 
who has obtained such Husband, is also most fortunate. That excellent Lady 
has obtained the highest goal of Her womanly birth., Thus praised repeatedly 
and without stint every male and female who chanced to meet the Lord on 
His journey. The Sight of the Lord, Whom gods aspire to behold, was available 
to all persons. 

In this manner, moving slowly forward, Sree Gaursundar reached the bank of the 
Padmavati, in course of several days, journey. The Padmavati possesses 
the charming beauty of her mighty waves and excellent banks which look as 
if planted with orchards. As the Lord caught sight of Padmavati He 
sportively plunged into her water with His followers. From that day, sings 
Thakur Brindabandas, fortunate Padmavati acquired the efficacy to sanctify all 
the world. 

The river Padmavati is a most beautiful sight. Her waves, banks and strong 
current are most captivating. The Lord beheld the Padmavati, to her great 



good fortune, with the greatest Pleasure, and took up His residence on her bank. 
The Padmavati thus obtained the same high favour which had fallen to the lot of 
the Daughter of Janhu (the Bhagirathi). The Lord with His followers bathed 
daily in the water of the Padmavati and sported with the greatest ardour in her 
stream, just in the same way as He had done in the Ganges. 

Gaurchandra stayed for sometime in the country of Vanga. It is for this reason 
that East Bengal is a blessed land to this day. The Lord abode on the bank of 
the Padmavati. All the people were very much gladdened by the happy tidings 
of His Appearance in their midst. The tidings quickly spread in all directions 
that the Greatest of Professors, Nimai Pandit, had arrived in the country. All 
those worthy Brahmanas, who were really fortunate, soon presented 
themselves before the Lord with appropriate offerings for the teacher for 
admission to the high privilege of His Teaching. As they, presented themselves 
before the Lord they made their humble obeisance and supplicated for His 
favour with great humility to the effect that it is by our great good fortune that it 
has come to happen that Thou hast appeared in this country. The selfsame Person 
to Whom we are wont to resort for our studies carrying with us our treasure and 
family to distant Nabadwip, that rare Treasure Himself, has been brought Bodily 
to our own door by the Mercy of Godhead. Thou art the visible Incarnation 
of Brihaspati himself. There is no other Professor who is like Thee. Even 
the parallel of Brihaspati is not worthy of Thee. Thou seemst to be an 
Integral Portion of Godhead Himself, as no one except the Divinity can ever 
possess such scholarship and may attract so irresistibly the mind and treasure of 
all of us. We pray to Thee for the gift of a little learning to all of us. May we 
humbly submit, Best of the Twice-born, that all of us do study and teach by the 
help of 

Thy annotations and have thereby received already the indirect benefit of Thy 
most valuable instructions. May Thou be pleased to make us also Thy 
direct disciples that Thy Fame may pervade the whole world.’ The Lord 
encouraged them by His Smile and for a period, condescended to enact His 
Pastimes of Teacher in the country of East Bengal. 'By the force of this most 
fortunate event, writes Thakur Brindabandas, 'even to this day, all over the 
country of Bengal, males and females perform the congregational kirtan 
instituted by Sree Chaitanya.’ 


The place, where Sree Gaursundar took up His residence during His stay in 
Eastern Bengal, is not mentioned in any of the available records. Some 



maintain that it is the village of Magdoba in the district of Faridpur. It is 
necessary to note that the practice of the congregational kirtan initiated by Sree 
Chaitanya, in which both males and females took a part, was found to be already 
well established in different parts of East Bengal shortly after the Disappearance 
of Lord Chaitanya when Thakur Brindavandas wrote his immortal work. 

Thakur Brindavandas’s account gives us the further interesting information that 
Nimai Pandit was the Author of a gloss on the Kalapa Vyakarana which 
was extensively used in the tols of Eastern Bengal. But we have not yet come 
across any copy of the gloss if, indeed, one was ever actually penned by 
Sree Chaitanya. 

This puts it beyond all doubt that the Fame of Nimai Pandit as Professor is far 
from being a myth concocted by His Ignorant followers. The fact that 
the country of East Bengal with its great river was actually sanctified by the visit 
of the Supreme Lord, although the spiritual contention may not be 
really acceptable to the atheistical understanding, is the really momentous 
feature of the whole episode. There cannot be a greater fortune for a country 
than the Personal Presence of the Lord on its soil. The result is spiritual and 
eternal but is impossible to trace in a form that appeals to the heart of persons 
immersed in secular affairs. There may come a time when it will be possible to 
write the inner history of the wonderful vicissitudes of conditioned souls during 
their sojourn in this world from before the beginning of Time. The peripatetic 
Tour of Nimai Pandit in East Bengal will appear in the true perspective in such 
a Narrative as fraught with consequences that are not measurable in terms of 
any mundane value. It is necessary for the purpose of the present account to hint 
at the associated result. The land trod by the Lotus Feet of Sree 
Chaitanya becomes the Hallowed Tirtha which it is the bounden duty of all 
Vaishnavas to visit. The country which is cherished by the Vaishnavas is 
afforded the only chance of attaining to the pure service of the Lord. 

The Lord was seen, as He really is, by many fortunate inhabitants of East 
Bengal, both male and female. The female realized Him as the ideal Son 
and Husband. In the literature of the sect which calls itself ‘Gaur-nagaris’ the 
fact, so clearly stated by Sree Brindavandas Thakur, has been willfully distorted 
in order to suit their theory that Nimai Pandit excited the passion 
of unconventional amour in all female beholders. But Nimai Pandit was the 
Ideal Husband and Son and the Teacher by His Own Personal Example of the 
spiritual necessity of absolute abstinence from sexuality. The Supreme Lord in 
His Pastimes as Sree Chaitanya does not appear in His Roll of Enjoyer 



and Proprietor of all things. Sree Chaitanya is not Sree Krishna as Lover of 
others, but Sree Krishna as loving Himself. The two roles are wholly different 
and cannot be confounded with one another. One who loves the Lord has no 
desire for his own enjoyment; whereas the Lord Himself possesses an infinite 
desire for every form of enjoyment. The insatiable desire for enjoyment of the 
Lord provides the perennial opportunity of His service to all pure souls. It was 
the object of Sree Chaitanya to show by His Own Conduct how this service is to 
be performed by the pure souls. For the conditioned soul accordingly the Leela 
of Sree Chaitanya is unambiguously wholesome as affording him the chance 
of learning the service of the Supreme Lord by His Own Guidance and Example. 
It is, therefore, necessary to be on one’s guard against any willful distortion of 
the nature of these Supremely Magnanimous Activities of the Lord. They are 
not identical with, but correspondent to, the Dvapara Leela of Sree Krishna. 

The necessity of this caution will appear from a consideration of the following 
facts recorded by Thakur Brindavandas to warn us against the fatal 
consequences of misrepresenting the Teachings of Sree Chaitanya from worldly 
motives. 

It is, of course, not possible for any except the specially fortunate to understand 
the Transcendental Activities of the Divinity. It is no undue disparagement of the 
nature of the conditioned soul to declare that he has no chance of understanding 
the Ways of Providence by his own puny effort. That, which becomes intelligible 
to the reason of man by its assertive exertions, is necessarily limited. We are 
fatally disposed to be complacently content with such knowledge (?) as comes to 
us in the shape of our so-called acquisitions. 

But they are not the Whole Truth. That which is limited, that is to say exceeded 
or contained by. the limited reason of man, is rejected by his soul as unnecessary 
and worthless, the moment its limited character is clearly demonstrated. So there 
is a constitutional spiritual hankering for the limitless in our proper selves. This 
hankering also imperatively demands complete satisfaction. Such satisfaction is 
declared by all the scriptures to be realizable by the method of submissive 
acceptance of the grace of the transcendental teacher. We feel no hesitation to 
submit to the teacher (?) of the limited and are also proud to be the slaves of the 
laws of Nature. But when it is proposed that we should submit to the Unlimited 
or, in other words, be really free, we vehemently object to the process on the 
ground that we are likely to lose our birth-right of freedom by being deprived of 
the slavery of Physical Nature. It is this disloyal irrationality that is the only 
stumbling block in our way and which prevents us, more effectively than we are 



ever sincerely prepared to admit, from having any access to the actual realm of 
the Absolute. There are very few persons, indeed, who are not too obsessed by 
such misconceptions not to misunderstand the logic of the argument set forth 
above; and fewer persons still who are prepared to act up to it in practice. 

The people of East Bengal, enlightened by the mercy of Sree Gaursundar, 
adopted the method of congregational chanting of the Name of Hari as the 
true universal method of worshipping Godhead. But no sooner did they accept 
the form of the pure religion than they were victimized by a regular succession 
of pseudo-saviours. Even by the time of Thakur Brindavandas there had 
already arisen quite a large number of these pretenders to savourship and they 
had actually done a good deal of positive harm. One of these degraded wretches 
in order to gain his livelihood passed himself off as Raghunath, the Avatara of 
Vishnu. Another sinner persuaded the people to sing him as Narayana by giving 
up the congregational chant of Krishna established by Sree Gaursundar. 

Commenting on the doings of these profane hoary rascals Thakur Brindavandas 
notes the height of absurdity of people, who are so entirely at the mercy 
of Physical Nature that she makes them change their point of view three times 
in course of every day, being able to induce any one to mistake such ROGUES 
as themselves as the Supreme Lord. There was one of these devils, a pseudo- 
Brahmana, in the country of Rarh, who wore the mask of a Brahmana but 
was really a savage cannibal. This particular rascal had the audacity of making 
the people call him ‘Gopala’ (the Divine Cow-Boy Krishna); for which reason 
he was nick-named the ‘Shiald (fox) by the people. 

Thakur Bindabandas uses very strong language, indeed, in his open 
condemnation of the practices of both these pretenders to saviourship and 
their deluded followers. He is specially grieved for the latter, declaring that 
the wretch who accepts any person as Godhead in lieu of Sree Chaitanya, is 
the worse criminal of the two. He then solemnly exhorts all persons To accept 
as true the facts that Gauranga Sree Hari is the Lord of the infinity of worlds, 
that all bondage wears off by the mere recollection of His Name, that one 
triumphs over all adverse circumstances if he but recollects even His servants. 
The Praises of the Lord are sung by the whole world. It is imperatively necessary 
to serve the Feet of the Lord after the manner of Himself, by discarding the 
wrong path.’ 


The danger from pseudo-saviours is twofold. They (1) induce the people to give 



up the worship of the Lord and (2) make their victims serve their own 
vile selves. The method that was adopted for gaining these ends was 
outwardly similar to that of Sree Chaitanyadeva. Thy also prescribed the 
congregational chanting of the name of Godhead meaning themselves. 'Sree 
Chaitanya is Godhead Himself. There is no impropriety in chanting His Name. 
There would be the most fatal dereliction of one’s duty if one disbelieves the 
Divinity of Sree Chaitanya. The only duty of all His followers is to proclaim this 
Truth to all the world in the clearest possible manner so that no one may suffer 
by missing the excellent opportunity of serving the Supreme Lord in the only 
feasible way in this controversial Age which is devoid of natural faith. Those 
people who do not believe in the Divinity of Sree Chaitanya, are alone 
unfortunate, as they are prevented from adopting the only method of attaining 
the transcendental service of Godhead. This is the sad lot of the Sceptics. There 
is, however, a lot that is even worse than that of the Sceptics, viz., that which 
befalls the disloyal over-credulous. They allow themselves to be misled by the 
sufficiently transparent artifices of audacious rascals who know very well how to 
exploit their weakness. The true course lies midway between these extremes. 

The conduct and speech of the followers of Sree Chaitanya are, indeed, liable to 
be misunderstood by the hypocrites and their victims, in opposite ways. 

The atheistic credulous are apt to be misled by rascals who pass themselves off 
as Godhead for their utter want of faith in Sree Chaitanya. The faith in 
Sree Chaitanya is to be attained by avoiding the defects of disloyal credulity on 
the one hand and of scoffing incredulity on the other. It is, therefore, necessary 
to be cautiously but fully open to real enlightenment. But the case of 
those unfortunate people who are over-credulous on principle is the most 
deplorable of all, inasmuch as they are sure to fall into the clutches of those 
hypocritical rascals whose business it is to lead all those, who deliberately seek 
the untruth, still further away from the Truth. The only way of avoiding this 
danger is not to court it by neglecting the proper exercise of one’s natural sense 
of right and wrong and by not following in all sincerity what really appears to be 
the right path even to our present imperfect judgment. The only right conduct, 
which also should spontaneously suggest itself to all persons so 
conducting themselves, is the cultivation of exclusive association with those who 
actually lead the spiritual life by avoidance of all unspiritual company. By such 
conduct the innate tendency for the service of the Truth is strengthened and the 
chance of benefiting by the instructions of the bona fide sadhus, who come to 
every seeker of their own accord, is decisively increased. 


But it is not till one has the opportunity of the right kind of personal association 



with sadhus that he has any substantive chance of spiritual enlightenment, i.e, of 
realizing his natural faith in the Actiue Existence of Personal Godhead. One who 
seeks to undergo the necessary training for being fitted for the spiritual service of 
the Supreme Lord, can obtain real and effective help in this Age from no one 
else except Sree Chaitanya. But it is reserved only for those who are sincere 
seekers of the Absolute Truth to realize this. One may be very dull or very 
intelligent, as the world goes. Such dullness and cleverness will equally help or 
retard one’s progress on the spiritual path according as he is sincerely disposed 
to serve. The theory of good conduct is related to substantive good conduct 
itself, as shadow to substance. The substance necessarily includes the shadow, 
but not vice versa. Right conduct is the practice of substantive sincerity. Those 
who are disposed to under value actual conduct regarding it as external are liable 
to overlook this all-important consideration. External conduct can alone feed the 
inner enlightenment by the process of concrete actual growing experience of the 
reality. The experience of the service of the Lord resulting from conduct 
possesses far greater enlightening power than the experience of worldly affairs, 
inasmuch as on the spiritual plane conduct and theory are really identical. A dull 
person who sincerely acts under the direction of a sadhu, attains the spiritual 
vision in much the same time that is taken by an intelligent person who is 
equally sincere. Worldly dullness does not stand in the way of obtaining the 
service of the Godhead, provided there is no deliberate insincerity. The dull 
person is never made intelligent in the worldly sense by his spiritual 
enlightenment. He still appears to be very dull to worldly people who are devoid 
of all true intelligence and incapable of understanding the perfectly cognizant 
spiritual conduct of the bona -fide servant of the Lord. 

That, which appears to be wrong or right to the stultified conscience of the 
conditioned soul, is undoubtedly true for the time being, although the hollow and 
ephemeral nature of empiric ethical conduct must be patent to everyone who 
feels the slightest inclination for the ethical principle. Spiritual conduct is not 
mechanically attained either by practising or by discarding the empiric ethical 
conduct. In the conditioned state, ethical conduct with the necessary safeguards 
should be undoubtedly obligatory and one, who may be wantonly disposed to 
disregard the rules of morality, should be regarded as a real menace not only to 
social but also to spiritual well-being, and such conduct should be punished by 
all means. This will also automatically prevent the exploitation of the unthinking 
masses by the otherwise formidable gang of the pseudoreligionists. It is 
absolutely necessary to try resolutely to avoid this last-mentioned danger. But 
one should at the same time be careful not to fall into the blunder of supposing 



that empiric morality is the absolute principle or that social or domestic well¬ 
being is the summum bonum of human life. If the standpoint from which the 
moralist regards life be incapable of affording us a view of the Truth, in spite of 
any passing conveniences that may seem to result from its adoption, it should be 
the bounden duty of the human reason to seek for further enlightenment. Such an 
attempt may, indeed, show our want of absolute faith in the conclusions of 
empiric morality. But it is not antagonistic to the empiric moral principle. On the 
contrary it marks the stage of distinct ethical progress emhodying as it does the 
conviction that speculative morality does not take us far enough towards the 
attainment of the goal vaguely proposed by such morality. 

Spiritual conduct, indeed, must not be imagined as identical with the empiric 
moral conduct, nor as its derivative. By the cultivation of so-called moral 
living the spiritual life is not positively realizable. Moral life is the imaginary 
Ultima Thule of the advocates of so-called worldly well-being. The vision of the 
empiric moralists cannot pass the bounding line of the horizon of this world. 

The principles of empiric morality have a limited and temporary value. They 
are rehabilitated, not supplemented by the laws of spiritual living. One, who 
is truly anxious for spiritual enlightenment must, therefore, be prepared also for 
a thorough re-adjustment of his moral conduct both as regards its 
external manifestation and internal attitude. This change will not coincide with 
the requirements of the really irrational form of living striven for by the 
worldly minded ethical person and may even be found fault with by those who 
are thoughtless enough to imagine the correlative worldly principle to be 
the obligatory rule of human conduct. Such opposition is beside the point and 
has always to be reckoned with by all sincere seekers of the service of the 
Absolute Truth. It has its value for the negative well-being of the world in 
forcing the spiritual novice to explain his purpose to his opponents in an 
intelligible form thus helping the diffusion of the knowledge of the Truth and 
preventing hasty adoption of untruth that is found to parade in the garb of truth 
in this world. 

But one may also commit the no less fatal blunder of waiting too long to 
embrace the Truth when He actually presents Himself by pretending to 
be cautious. If this is hypocrisy or idleness, as is often the case such a 
procedure will not help one progress towards the Truth. It is necessary to be 
sincerely prepared to firmly discard all untruth and to accept actively the Truth at 
all time in proportion to our real convictions. One who does not do so, is still 
the unreclaimed egotist who has not yet to acquire the salutary ambition 



for seeking to become an humble and active servant of the Absolute Truth. 

A seeker of the active service of the Truth should also be prepared to commit 
an infinity of mistakes in his honest endeavour to find Him. Indifference 
and idleness are the masked-forms of hostility to the principle of spiritual 
service and have to be most carefully avoided by all who are truly desirous of 
attaining the service of the Truth. 

The Lord stayed for two months in East Bengal moving about in different 
directions always taking a particular interest in visiting the river 
Padmavati. There was a great resuscitation of sound erudition by His scholastic 
exertions. Hundreds of persons returned to their homes gaining their diploma by 
a brief course of study under the Lord;—such is the wonderful Power of 
Sree Chaitanya. The whole of East Bengal rushed to the Feet of Nimai Pandit for 
the acquisition of learning. Thousands of persons in this manner became 
the disciples of the Lord; and it is impossible to ascertain the number of those 
who obtained the blessing of His Teaching. 

Meanwhile at Nabadwip Lakshmi Devi was very much distressed in Her heart 
by separation from Her Lord. She did not divulge Her condition to any one. 

She constantly served the mother. She tasted no food since the departure of 
the Lord but only made a show of accepting food as a mere formality. She 
was stricken at heart with the deepest grief by separation from Her Lord. She 
wept all through the nights by Herself. Sree Lakshmi Devi got no respite from 
Her great anxiety even for a moment. She at last felt the separation to be 
wholly unbearable and wished to make Her way to the presence of Her 
Lord. Thereupon, leaving behind in this world a body resembling Her 
Own Transcendental Form, Lakshmi Devi silently betook Herself to the Side of 
Her Husband, eluding the notice of everybody. Holding closely to Her heart 
the Lotus Feet of the Lord, Lakshmi Devi thus found Her way to the bank of 
the holy Ganges, in the state of beatific contemplation. 

Thakur Brindavandas has refrained from describing the grief of Sree Sachi Devi 
at the Disappearance of Lakshmi, remarking that the cries of the mother 
melted even hearts of wood. The neighbors were very much pained by hearing of 
the departure of Sree Lakshmi Devi and turned up to do their customary duties 
by the departed. 


The term used in the Shastras to denote the Consort of Godhead is ‘Shakti which 
may be rendered as ‘Power’. Godhead is the Possessor or Lord, of all Powers. 



The Power of the Supreme Lord wears a twofold aspect and serves Him in 
apparently opposite ways. There is in the first place the spiritual Aspect. This is 
the Enlightening Aspect of the Divine Power and it is this Aspect that is directly 
obeyed by all bona fide servants of the Lord. There is also the deluding, Material 
or Limiting Aspect. This Aspect is of the nature of the Shadow of the Spiritual 
Aspect and as such manifests Herself at the opposite pole as the negative and 
subordinate form of the Spiritual Aspect. This second Aspect is called in the 
Shastras ‘Maya Shakti or the ‘limliting Power ; while the Spiritual Aspect is 
called Chit Shakti or Cognitive Power. The two are not really separate, as the 
material Aspect is correlative and wholly under the control of the Spiritual 
Power. The bona -fide servants of the Supreme Lord are not under the necessity 
of obeying His Material or Limiting Power. Sree Lakshmi Devi is the Plenary 
aspect of the Spiritual Power of the Lord. 

The relation of the Spiritual Power to the Supreme Lord, Who bears the Name of 
Sree Krishna, is one of indivisibility. Sree Krishna as the Lord of His 
‘Chit Shakti' is the Possessor and Controller of Power by means of the Divine 
Will, while Sree Lakshmi Devi, the Spiritual Power of the Lord is the Executrix 
of the Divine Will. Between the Divine Will and the Agency of His execution 
there is no difference of category, the One automatically and fully implying the 
Other. Sree Lakshmi Devi is the Plenary Power of Sree Krishna, representing the 
Will of Her Lord and carrying out the Same in regard to the secondary powers. 
Maya or the Material Power, is the Negative, Deluding Face of the Spiritual 
Power for the performance of a subordinate function that is secondary of 
correcting the paltry perversity of dissociated souls and for this reason being 
necessarily superfluous in the Spiritual Realm. The Material Power is 
comparable in Her action to the operation of a piece of cloud on the broad 
bosom of the spotless sky preventing the conditioned souls of this phenomenal 
world from obtaining a view of the Great Sun Sree Krishna. The cloud devised 
by Maya is a very very small part of the Cosmic arrangement, serving the 
Spiritual Power in a negative capacity for the sustenance of disloyal souls and 
correcting their perversity by providing the congenial scope for its indulgence. 
Maya has to employ deception in order to correct without resorting to any 
violence, the perversity of the dissociated soul due to the abuse of his freedom to 
choose his own course. But this necessity to deceive has no place in the 
economy of the Spiritual Universe. 

We are in this place concerned with the question of the intervention of the 
Spiritual Power in the benighted sphere under the penal jurisdiction of 



Maya. This is the Descent (Avatara) of Sree Krishna into this world For this 
Purpose the Lord employs the smallest fraction of His Spiritual Power, Or sends 
down Those Infinity of Plenary Divine Forms of His Own Who serve in diverse 
ways the Various Purposes of His Endless Activities, or He Himself comes down 
into this world. Sree Lakshmi Devi, the Eternal Consort of the Lord executes 
all these Purposes of the Lord through every degree and variety of Her co¬ 
ordinate manifestation. She is identical with the Divine Activity. 

But the Principle which constitutes the bond between Sree Lakshmi Devi and the 
Supreme Lord, is not one of mechanical submission and domination. It is not at 
all like the relationship that exists in this phenomenal world between material 
power and its deluded possessor or slave. Neither is it the so-called rational 
submission which is conceivable by the perverted reason of the conditional soul. 
The Principle is expressed in the Shastras by the term ‘prema’ ordinarily 
rendered into the English word ‘love\ although the word love, does not possess 
the spiritual significance of ‘prema\ ‘Prema’, or ‘spiritual love’, maybe defined 
as the principle of conduct that aims exclusively and causelessly at the 
gratification of the Spiritual Senses of Krishna. Unspiritual love (karma) 
is defined as the principle that aims at the gratification of the material senses 
of non-Krishna i.e. of the agent himself. 

Divine Personality, as conceived by the conditioned soul, is a profanation. The 
worldly notion of personality is radically unwholesome, being made of 
material stuff. It is not possible for the conditioned soul to conceive of 
personality except in terms of a phy-sical body bound to a sensuous mind 
delighting in its inextricable union with the former. This gross conception of 
personality also finds its way into the empiric attempt to conceive a Personal 
Godhead. The unwillingness on the part of empiricists to recognize the Divine 
Personality, is due to their apprehension of the inevitable presence of grossness 
in the personal conception itself. They naturally hesitate to extend to the 
Supreme Entity who is declared by the Scriptures and the innate senses of all 
humanity to be free from the least taint of unwholesomeness the degrading 
notion of personality that is conceivable to the reason of the conditioned soul. 
But there would be no ground for such hesitation if the Divine Personality were 
found to be really such as to make Him not only altogether free from our actual 
gross experience of personality of this world, but in perfect keeping with the 
highest requirements of our unbiased reason, which Can never be really satisfied 
with its hypothetical concoctions, and also with the declarations of the 
Scriptures. 



The conditioned soul posing as a person is possessed of two conjoined sets of 
apparatus called indiscriminately in the English language, by the same word viz. 
‘senses \ The internal, cognitive sense-principle operates on the external world 
in the conditioned state by an external process of physical perception through the 
medium of the physical sense-organs directed and supplemented by the re-action 
of the material mind which educes the subtle entities of precepts and concepts 
from the gross impressions of external objects supplied initially by the physical 
organs. The personality of the conditioned soul is empirically supposed to 
consist definitely and concretely of the enveloping material principles and 
processes of the mind and the physical sense-organs directed to the objects of 
phenomenal Nature and tending to material gratification realizable in terms of 
the same by the inner conscious principle which remains otherwise passive. The 
unwholesome element of such personality consists in its material sensuousness. 
The inner conscious principle, by seeking to establish his affinity with the 
objects of phenomenal Nature, is ultimately responsible for the perpetuation of 
the super-imposed unwholesome ego thus realized as the individual personality 
which is condemned by the spiritual pro-personalists and the empiric 
impersonalists alike. 

Philanthropism is the result of the unpardonable and sacrilegious attempt to 
make an ideal of this pseudo-personality and to thrust it also on the 
Divinity Himself. This is not always unaccompanied by a suspicion of the 
incongruity of such attempt. But the philanthropists fall into this utterly profane 
error by striving to escape by a natural impulse from the suicidal alternative of 
the acceptance of the principle of impersonality proposed by the logical school 
of Empiricism. But by confounding the mundane for the Divine they prove to 
be even worse enemies of theism than the impersonalists. 

The tragedy of the profession of the spiritual ?) nature the mundane personality 
is due to the incongruous association of soul with matter in the state of bondage. 
The conditioned soul deliberately seeks sensuous gratification, which is foreign 
to his own spiritual nature, by making the world serve the pleasures of the 
senses. The principle on which he is made to set to work in such a process is 
supplied by his deluded assumption that he is proprietor, or enjoyer of this 
material world. But the role which is thus attempted is one that is foreign to the 
real nature of the jiva soul. 

This proposed proprietorship means the domination of the infinitesimally little 
over the Infinitely Great. Such a process can by its nature be only delusive 



and disappointing. If the tiny soul allows himself to be dominated by the 
Supreme Soul he suffers from no such self-elected difficulty. The Supreme Soul 
can find the employment for the tiny soul that relieves the latter from the 
necessity of seeking the impossible unnatural paltry satisfaction of the gross 
physical senses. In the perfectly pure rational existence the subordination of the 
really little to the really Great is realized as being necessarily natural and 
congenial. It is the unnatural domination of the non-rational and the non-Great 
that demoralizes the soul in the conditioned state. The only cure of the 
aberrations of this frail so-called mundane personality is, therefore, supplied by 
the arrangement of the positive spiritual service of the supreme Soul by the little 
souls, not mechanically as proposed by the smartas, for the purpose of the 
gratification of the physical senses, nor impersonally which tantamounts to self- 
destruction but for the infinitely higher purpose of seeking the gratification of 
the Spiritual Senses of the Supreme Person Who is the necessarily Absolute 
Proprietor of everything. 

The Supreme Dominating Person can be served positively and consciously by 
reciprocal dominated personalities and only negatively and unconsciously 
by impersonal entities. Hence the real reciprocal spiritual personality of his 
willing servants, or powers, is proved. The relation of the individual soul to 
the Supreme Soul is not identical with, but the reciprocal of the relationship of 
the Supreme Soul to the jiva. Sree Lakshmi Devi seeks the gratification of 
the Senses of Sree Krishna by an infinite number of complementary 
little personalities of various dimensions and specifications acting in 
perfect harmony for ministering to the pleasure of the Perfect Senses of Sree 
Krishna. The Personality of Sree Lakshmi Devi is not one of enjoyer but of 
provider of the Enjoyment of Sree Krishna and She serves only the Pleasure of 
Krishna. 

This reciprocal function in its twofold aspect, is ‘prema’ or ‘spiritual love’. 

So when the Supreme Lord intervenes Personally in the affairs of this mundane 
world for the deliverance of conditioned souls, Sree Lakshmi Devi 
ever accompanies Him and carries out the Wishes of Her Lord towards the 
jiva souls. 

This is the real background of the picture drawn by Thakur Brindavandas. But 

the role that Sree Lakshmi Devi has to play as the consort of the 

ideal householder-devotee during his sojourn, by command of the Lord, in 



this material world, is only One Aspect of Her Divine Function as the 
Eternal consort of Her Supreme Husband in the Realm of the Absolute. She is 
the servant of the Servant of the Lord. She has to minister to the pleasure of 
the Supreme Lord under the direction of Himself as Servant in the role 
of Householder. She must not, therefore regard Her Husband as identical with 
the Supreme Lord in His Nature of Absolute Proprietor. She must not suppose 
that Her Husband stands in need of, or has any inclination for, enjoyment of 
any kind for Himself. Her Function as the Consort of the Devotee corresponds to 
that of Her Husband, Both acting the part of Associated Servants of the Supreme 
Lord in Their Roles of Husband and Wife of Each other, in order to teach 
the deluded wives and husbands of this world their proper relationship to 
one another in conformity with their absolute loyalty to Krishna. 

Her pang of separation is, therefore, inexplicable on the supposition that Sree 
Lakshmi Devi actually experienced the discomforts of a mortal wife placed in 
a similar circumstance; although Her Conduct seems to be due to such 
motive. Her Disappearance from this world, which is ascribed to the intensity of 
Her Sorrow, also calls for a little explanation to prevent any 
gross misunderstanding. 

Sree Lakshmi Devi was engaged in tending Sree Sachi Devi by Command of 
Sree Gaursundar during His tour of East Bengal. By refusing to take food 
and drink and forming the resolution of deliberately starving Herself to death ( ?) 
to put an end to Her own grief, She might be supposed to have been 
apparently neglecting the duty assigned to Her by Her Husband. To this the 
Conduct of Sree Vishnupriya Devi, after Renunciation of the Lord and also 
subsequently to His Disappearance from this world, would seem to be a great 
contrast. 

The duty of a faithful wife whose husband is abroad, as laid down in the 
Shastras, is to eschew all comforts for herself and keep her mind 
perpetually fixed on her absent husband. By this means she would be enabled to 
retain and augment the constancy and intensity of her love for her husband. A 
wife may be faithful to her husband either quite causelessly out of pure love, or 
from a sense of duty, or for her own selfish happiness. The wife, who loves her 
husband causelessly, is supposed to be the ideal wife; while one, who minds her 
own advantage in caring for her husband, is rewarded as a hypocrite. But none 
of these have any, reference to the service of the Supreme Lord. If the 
husband himself be a servant of Vishnu it is only then that the conduct of the 



wife, who seeks to assist him in such service, necessarily also attains the level of 
service of the Divinity. In this case any love, duty or indifference, shown to the 
husband personally , without any conscious realization of his function as servant 
of the Lord, would also seem at first sight to fall short of the full service of 
Krishna. 

This brings us really to the dangerous ground. It is, of course, possible for his 
wife to be carnally attached to a Vaishnava husband. If it be so, what will be 
the consequence of such attachment? A Vaishnava by his very nature can never 
be a participator in the carnality of his wife. There can, therefore, be no chance 
of reciprocal carnality in such a case, as the wife would receive no 
encouragement to follow her suicidal course. There would then remain the 
chance of her own regeneration if her attachment to the Vaishnava husband, 
although due to carnal motive, induces her to serve him faithfully through all 
apparent neglect on his part. This will tend to establish that real contact between 
the two which will he undoubtedly beneficial for both, if the husband continues 
true to the Lord. Even if in such a case the wife be not enabled to attain to the 
conscious service of the Lord she would unconsciously take a long stride in the 
direction of such service. If, therefore, the husband be a true Vaishnava a path is 
opened thereby even to a carnally disposed wife to attain to the spiritual 
condition by serving him in a friendly way. Any service rendered to a Vaishnava 
from any kind of friendly motive, is rewarded by the attainment of the summum 
bonum. 

On the other hand the only conduct, that is really obstructive of the spiritual 
well-being of any person, is that inspired by disinclination to serve 
the Vaishnavas or a positive inclination to oppose or vilify them. 

The spiritual service of Krishna offers unfettered freedom of choice to 
everybody as regards the form in which it is to be rendered. The only thing 
needed is absence of conscious aversion to the Lord or to His servants, and 
especially the latter. Any aversion shown to the servants of the Lord is fatal for 
the same reason that makes any form of friendly attachment to him a means of 
assured safety. There is no other way for the deliverance of conditioned souls 
except by serving the servants of the Lord, who appear in our midst and who 
by command of the Lord graciously accept any and every form of service for 
the well-being of all sinners without exception. 

Therefore, judged from the point of view of the wife of the ideal house-holder- 



devotee the conduct of Sree Lakshmi Devi is self-protected against all adverse 
criticism for the reason that it happened to be of the nature of an intense friendly 
attachment for the Servant of the Lord. Her Role was, therefore, exactly in 
keeping with the Purpose of the Lord Himself and vital for clearing up 
most serious misconceptions on the subject of one’s duty by a Vaishnava. 

The Departure of Sree Lakshmi Devi to Her Own Realm of Vaikuntha did not in 
anyway obstruct the Activities of the Lord. The loyal wife of the most 
rabid worldling can desire for no more pleasant exit from this world than 
was exhibited by Sree Lakshmi Devi without any of the unwholesome factors 
that are necessarily associated with the departure of the sinner. 

But as a matter of fact the mode of Disappearance from this world of the 
Supreme Lord and His Eternal Consorts, servitors and paraphernalia 
is altogether different from the death of a mortal. The art of the 
magician furnishes the nearest parallel of the Divine Activity. The magical 
performs the feat of dying in his own person to the view of the spectators 
without really dying at all. Sree Lakshmi Devi deluded the people into believing 
that they witnessed Her death to the detail of cremating her Supposed dead 
body, independently of any change to Herself. The creation of an actual physical 
body was not necessary as the Eternal Consort of the Lord is the Mistress of 
physical Nature and performs all Her Spiritual Acts, even in this world, without 
any positive help of the Deluding Material Energy, Who is Her Own 
subservient Shadow 

But the Grief of Sree Lakshmi Devi, which was the cause of Her Departure, was 
not a pretense. The Lord has the Power of making Himself invisible even to Sree 
Lakshmi Devi. Herself The Grief of Sree Lakshmi Devi is, however, not like the 
grief of conditioned souls who are pained by being deprived of their opportunity 
of selfish enjoyment. Sree Lakshmi Devi is the Eternally Inseparable Consort of 
the Supreme Lord, but is nevertheless not identical with Him. It is this which 
makes possible Their Relationship of Love in Union and Separation. She has 
Her Existence in the Divine Lunction of causeless loving service of the Supreme 
Lord. She serves the Lord equally both in union and separation. So there is no 
decrease of love or bliss but only a change of the form of service when Sree 
Lakshmi Devi displays the extreme Grief of Separation from Her Only Lord. 



Chapter 14 Tapan Misra: Return from East Bengal 


After staying for a while in East Bengal the Lord made up His mind to return 
Home. On being apprised of the intention of the Lord the people of those 
parts brought various offerings of all their treasure. The presents included 
gold, silver, pots for holding water, excellent seats, finely dyed blankets, a 
great variety of clothing, etc. All persons gladly made an offering of all the best 
things of their households. Lord Gauranga-Sree Hari was pleased to accept 
their offerings, bestowing His Merciful Glance on all. Having taken His leave of 
all persons Lord Sree Gauranga set out for His Own Home, Many students 
from East Bengal followed the Lord to Nabadwip to study under Him there. 

The Lord apparently did not think it to be incompatible with the duty of a-house- 
holder to accept the presents of the people of East Bengal for imparting them 
knowledge of the Shastras. This may be objected to on the ground that 
it amounts to nothing less than the selling of knowledge which is forbidden 
by the Shastras. There is a distinction between professional teachers of 
different branches of secular knowledge and the preacher of the Religion. 

The profession of a secular teacher is recommended by the Shastras as 
unobjectionable from the worldly point of view and is given preference over 
other occupations for earning a livelihood. The Lord does not appear in East 
Bengal as Preacher of the Religion. The Shastras forbid selling of religious 
teaching. 

The preacher of religion must not accept any remuneration for his services as 
preacher. If he accepts payment and is dependent on it for his livelihood 
he cannot but desire to please his pay-masters and thus fail to maintain 
his unconditional adherence to the Truth, which is essential in every bona 
fide preacher of the religion. The least concession to any worldly purpose makes 
a person, unfit for being a preacher of the Absolute Truth. It is, 
therefore, absolutely necessary to keep the whole arrangement for the preaching 
of Religion outside the obligations of the social systems devised for the 
attainment of purely worldly ends; as any adulteration is bound to be productive 
of irreparable mischief for all concerned, there is no harm in any one 
accepting presents in return for imparting knowledge of the Shastras to his 
students. 



These payments also were voluntary and not confined to the students. 


It was apparently regarded as the duty of all house-holders to place the best part 
of their wealth at the disposal of the secular teachers of the people. This was a 
social arrangement for the promotion of secular learning. It had nothing to do 
with the preaching of the religion. The people naturally flocked to Nimai Pandit 
in order to study Vyakarana as He was reputed to be the greatest scholar of that 
day. They had their reward in gaining scholarship of a superior order in a short 
time. 

There was, however, one notable exception. A most fortunate Brahmana, by 
name Tapan Misra, presented himself before the Lord on the eve of His 
return from East Bengal, with the intention of obtaining a solution of his 
doubts regarding the real nature of the Object and method of spiritual practices. 
Tapan Misra was not one of the ordinary type of inquirers who believe it to be 
their duty to be curious about everything and therefore also about religion. 

The problem, with which Tapan Misra approached the Lord, had been suggested 
in course of a long endeavour to find the Truth by the method of 
sincerely following out the injunctions of the Shastras. Tapan Misra had already 
lost all taste for worldly life. He was in that critical state when the mode of life, 
with which he had been familiar, had ceased to interest, but when yet no 
satisfactory substitute had been found. Being naturally of a perfectly sincere turn 
of mind he had not sat down tightly on his doubts. He had been to all persons 
whom he considered likely to be able to help him in solving his doubts. These 
doubts were troubling him in spite of the conventional religious life with its 
theory and practices which, as the duty of one born in a Brahmana family, he had 
duly inherited and which he had been trying sincerely to follow up in life. He 
was too genuinely inquisitive to be content without troubling about the real value 
of his inherited activities and their necessity for himself as an individual. He 
was, therefore, deeply pious in his external conduct but distracted within by 
the gravest doubts regarding his own real condition. This is a very 
rare combination. Habit is a formidable enemy on the path of progress if it 
happens to be unduly enamoured of itself and breeds the inclination to be really 
content with a bad thing. The human soul by his constitution is naturally 
opposed to anything short of the Absolute Truth. No mechanical dogmatism can 
satisfy him. The affairs of this world are carried on by most of us on the basis 
of working hypotheses called by the misleading designations of Natural Laws 
and Moral Principles. Their proper function is merely to stimulate, without 
being able to satisfy, our loyal inclination for the service of Truth. Those who 



suppose that it is never possible for us to-attain the Real, Immutable Truth, soon 
get reconciled to this ever-shifting hypothetical mode of living which alone 
is possible with the help of empiric ethics and the other empiric sciences. 

They are not pessimists as regards their own method. They subsist on the hope 
of a hypothetical notion called progressive improvement, without really caring 
to examine seriously the basis of such hope. 

Tapan Misra had ceased to be a contented empiricist. He had also failed to 
understand the basis of his own faith in the Scriptures. A careful study of 
the Shastras and prolonged performance of Shastric practices had failed to solve 
his doubts. He was studious, thoughtful and practical and had also been 
trying honestly to live the unworldly life enjoined by the Shastras. As the result 
of this he had made the discovery that it was not possible to understand or obey 
the Shastras, as their theories and injunctions seemed to contradict one 
another and certain principles also seemed wholly impossible to carry out in 
practice. 

He was too honest to be disposed to ignore or lightly explain away such 
discrepancies. In one word he was a seeker of the Absolute Truth and determined 
not to serve anything else under the name of the Truth. 

In this dilemma Tapan Misra had a wonderful dream. A celestial being appeared 
to him in his dream and advised him to proceed to Nimai Pandit Who 
would solve all his doubts. The god told him further that Nimai Pandit is no 
other than Narayana Himself Who had appeared in this world in His Human 
Form for delivering the conditioned souls. The Brahmana was also warned not 
to divulge this secret of the Vedas to anyone else as such conduct would 
entail trouble for him in all subsequent lives. The Brahmana shed copious tears 
on beholding this auspicious dream. Recovering his balance of judgment 
he blessed his good fortune and, fixing, his thoughts on the Lord, hastened to 
His Presence. 

Tapan Misra made his way to the place where the Lord was seated in the midst 
of His pupils, and, after making obeisance, stood before Him with the palms 
of his hands joined in the attitude of supplication. He then completely laid 
open his heart to the Lord, saying that the ordinary duties of life had lost all 
their charms for him, and that he was passing his days in a state of intense 
suspense, due to failure to understand the proper method and object of spiritual 
living. 



He had, therefore, come to Him for enlightenment on the subject, being fully 
convinced that there was no other way out of the difficulty except through 
His Mercy. He hoped to be delivered from the bondage of the world by 
His Kindness and prayed that He would overlook his unfitness and 
mercifully communicate to him the right method and object of spiritual living. 
He desired to learn the Truth from His Own Lips, and to be delivered thereby 
from the state of unbearable misery. 

The Lord told the Brahmana that he was most fortunate, as there cannot be any 
fortune higher than the condition of one who is desirous of serving Krishna with 
all his faculties. The service of Godhead is a subject that is most difficult 
to understand and is vast beyond all measure. The Supreme Lord Himself 
settles the form of His worship for every Age, proclaiming the same for 
the information of all. For this purpose He comes down into this mundane 
world in each of the four Ages. He returns to his Realm after settling the form of 
the Religion that is appropriate for each particular Age. The account of the 
Lord’s Appearances in this world is recorded in the Shastras for the information 
of everyone. The Lord Krishna Himself says in the Geeta, ‘I appear in this world 
in the successive Ages for the purpose of delivering the sadhus, for 
eliminating those who are addicted to evil and for fully establishing the 
Religion.’. The Bhagavatam says that “Krishna appears in each of the four Ages 
with a Different 

Complexion. He is White, Red and Yellow respectively in the three other Ages 
and is of a Dark Hue in Dwapara. The Colour That Krishna assumes in 
the different Ages corresponds to the character of the particular Age. The form 
of Religion, laid down by the Lord for the Kali Age, is the congregational chant 
of the Holy Name. There are four different forms of the religion to be followed 
by the souls in the different Ages. The object of all forms is the same. 

This common object is realized in the Krita Age by following the method 
of meditation (dhyana) on Vishnu; in the Treta Age by worshipping Him 
with sacrifices (makha); in the Dvapara Age by the mode of serving the Holy 
Form in the manner of ritualistic worship (archana) and in this Kali Age by 
chanting (Kirtan) Hari. The performance (yajna) of the chant of the Holy Name 
is, therefore, the only mode of the worship for the Kali Age. One cannot 
be delivered in the Iron Age by following any of the other prescribed forms 
of worship. The Vedas themselves fail to describe fully the praises due to one 
who takes the Holy Name night and day, eating or sleeping. It is necessary to 
note carefully that the modes of asceticism (tapas) and sacrifice (yajna) are 



forbidden in the Kali Age. Those, who worship Krishna, are most fortunate”. 

The Lord advised Tapan Misra to worship Krishna by staying at home, avoiding 
whatever was opposed to it positively or negatively, by the method of single- 
hearted devotion. Sree Gaursundar also assured Tapan Misra that he would 
realize the true nature of the object and mode of worship, and in fact everything, 
by means of the congregational chant of the Name of Hari. “The Name of Hari 
alone is efficacious. There is absolutely no other course in the Kali Age”. The 
Lord told Misra that the Name, or Mahamantra, That should be chanted consists 
of sixteen Names and thirty-two letters possessing the potency of the mantra, 

“Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare Hare Rama Hare 
Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare. ” 

He assured Misra that he would know the true object as well as method of 
spiritual living when by constant practice of chanting the Holy Name the 
first tender shoots of spiritual love (prema) would manifest themselves. 

Misra made repeated prostrated obeisances at the Feet of the Lord on learning 
this Teaching from the Mouth of the Lord Himself. The Misra said that he would 
like to remain with the Lord, if so commanded. But the Lord asked him to 
proceed to Varanasi (Benares) without delay, promising to meet him there and to 
tell him all the principles regarding method and object of spiritual living. 

This short Catechism, of the Creed laid down by the Supreme Lord as the only 
form of Religion of the present Age, will give the reader a concrete and 
definite but not the detailed idea of the form of worship established by Sree 
Chaitanya Deva. The principles as well as the practice, that are taught, will 
become clearer as we follow the Career of the Lord and His devotees through 
each successive chapter. But it is necessary to make a few observations on the 
subject without anticipating what is to follow in order to clear uncertain initial 
misconceptions that may trouble the reader in regard to the outline that is just 
offered. 

It is definitely declared that the object of Religion is one but its form varies from 
Age to Age. But the form is not evolved by the course of events of this world. 
The establishment of the form of worship appropriate for the particular Age is 
also a Divine event. This task is performed by the Supreme Lord Who comes 
down in this world for the purpose of establishing and proclaiming the form of 
the worship to be followed in each Age. This is a most important point. Those, 



who object to variety of the form of worship, are in the wrong. The variety of 
form is not evolved by the changing circumstances of this world, although it is 
of the nature of an adjustment. But the adjustment is not human, nor natural, but 
Divine, which is also made by the Lord Himself. By the side of this special form 
of worship established and proclaimed by the Lord Himself as the Dispensation 
of the Age there may and, as a matter of fact do, actually spring up quite a crop 
of the historical forms devised by the blind speculative instinct of the human 
mind to find its own independent solution of the problem of the true function of 
life. The Divine Dispensation of each Age is fully in accordance with the 
teaching of the whole body of the Shastras and is also definitely and clearly 
stated therein. This is the really authentic evidence of the Divine Dispensation 
for the present Age. This special form, though existing potentially in the record 
of the Scriptures, requires to be established and proclaimed by the Lord Himself 
to make it actually available for the Age. 

The significance of neither the Form nor the object of Divine Dispensations may 
be properly grasped by the conditioned soul unless and until he is inclined of his 
own accord to seek for the Truth by the method of giving up every other mode 
and object of living when and to the extent the Truth actually manifests Himself. 
This is the sine qua non, the only pre-requisite, for the spontaneous attainment of 
spiritual enlightenment. The points that are to be carefully remembered, are 
these: ‘Spiritual Truth is categorically and eternally different from all so-called 
empiric truth. Spiritual Truth is Eternal and Absolute by His Nature, whereas 
empiric truth is always tentative and changeable. The proper relation of the soul 
to Spiritual Truth is, therefore, that of unconditional, perfectly rational, 
submission; whereas the soul has no affinity whatsoever with the so-called 
empiric truth, which is a material product and towards which the human mind, 
mimicking the spiritual activity of the soul, pursues the plan of alternative 
adoption and rejection. It is the process which the mind is always disposed to 
proclaim as the function of the soul with whom it declares itself to be identical in 
order to delude the soul into agreeing to its unnatural domination. The mind is 
the agent of Maya for deluding the soul. Spiritual Truth cannot be discovered by 
the efforts of the materialized mind. The clear perception of this fact is the 
indispensable pre-requisite for experiencing any real desire for the Spiritual 
Truth. To such a seeker, say the Shastras, the Truth reveals His Own Form. The 
duty of the conditioned soul is, therefore, to disavow all connection with empiric 
truth in theory as well as in practice and to wait upon the pleasure of the 
Spiritual Truth for all enlightenment. Spiritual Truth, unlike dead material 
hypotheses, is a Living Entity possessing the power of the true initiative. 



Spiritual Truth is pleased to show Himself to the soul who, on realizing the 
inevitable futility of the empiric method of quest, is in search of the right method 
and object of the true rational inquiry.’ 

But a person, who is dissatisfied with the limitations and inconclusiveness of the 
method and object of the empiric search for Truth, need not necessarily accept 
the alternative of waiting upon the Pleasure of the Divinity, Who is identical 
with the Absolute Truth, for enlightenment. He may still continue to depend on 
human contrivance. He may believe in magic, He may believe in blind faith ( ?) 
He may believe in asceticism or yogic practices based on the principle of the 
efficacy of control over the mind promised by physical processes such as 
breathing exercises, etc., etc. He may also believe in direct revelation to his heart 
without the necessity of any extraneous effort on his part. It is always possible to 
secure a number of texts of the Shastras in apparent support of almost any view 
that one has already decided to adopt. The dissatisfaction, that leads to such 
futile activities, will be of no help in the quest of the Truth. 

The instrumentality of the mind and its speculative faculty need not, of course, 
be ignored. All, that is necessary, is to continue to use them vigorously, but with 
all due allowance for their limitations, in every endeavour for the attainment of 
the unalloyed service of the Truth. When the Absolute Truth makes His 
Appearance to the human soul the cognitive faculty has to be actively employed 
in His service if the Truth is to be realized. But our cognitive faculty must not be 
allowed to obstruct or to dominate the Absolute Truth. Our cognitive faculty 
must submit to be enlightened, not passively after the manner of stocks and 
stones, but by the full exercise of its active receptive function which is natural 
and possible for all self-conscious entities. The defect of the empiric method 
consists in over-estimating the scope and power of the selfconscious ( ?) 
principle in the conditioned soul. The self-conscious principle itself should not 
project itself in the material world by willfully disconnecting itself from the 
Source of all real self-consciousness. Such wrong relationship with matter is 
punished by the increasing curtailment of the scope, of activity of the conscious 
principle itself. Relationship of the soul with matter is possible and desirable but 
without losing connection with the very Source of selfconsciousness. The 
purpose of spiritual endeavour is to revive in an active form the dormant 
connection with the Source. But the mind is to be directed to the Source of its 
consciousness by the active exercise of all its faculties for the purpose. 


The existence of a recognizable and accessible Source of the pure, unobscured 



conscious principle is the initial necessity if any theory of the Absolute has to be 
translated into practice. This is supplied by the periodic Appearance of 
the Supreme Lord in this world. The Shastras are His harbingers. The idea, that 
Religion is identical with dogma in the empiric sense, is due to fundamental 
misconception of the nature of the function of the soul in his purely 
spiritual state. Submission to a half-conviction or unconviction is dogma in the 
real sense which is the very life of our ordinary wordly activity in all its forms. 
The almost unctuous fear of all dogma, that is so much affected by all 
empiricists, should appear to all consistent thinkers to be a piece of brazen 
hypocrisy. It is like the inveterate and designing thief warning honest people 
against the crime of theft in order to disarm all suspicions regarding the real thief 
who is no other than himself. The Shastras alone are not dogmatic, but are 
wholly opposed to and free from all taint of irrational empiric dogmas open and 
disguised. The Shastras, indeed, expose the futility and inconsistency of 
dogmatism to the chagrin of all hypocritical empiric professors and 
disseminators of rank dogmatism under the name of rationality. This is the 
destructive function of the Shastras. Their constructive function is to supply the 
clue to the Absolute Truth. 

But the Shastras are not themselves sufficient for the purpose of effecting the 
deliverance of conditioned souls, as the latter are on principle disinclined to give 
them an unprejudiced, complete and patient hearing. The few, who 
are exceptions to this rule, are bound to attain the Tmth if after carefully 
studying the Shastras they do not misunderstand, or imperfectly understand, or 
fail to act up to, the method laid down in the Shastras, in a perfectly convincing 
and cognisable manner, for the quest of the Absolute Truth. 

Tapan Misra could understand neither the method nor the object of spiritual 
endeavour as laid down in the Shastras. He had been confused by his 
own honest endeavour. The methods that he had followed had actually failed, 
and he was also aware of this fact, to yield the result promised by the Shastras. 

It is, no doubt, impossible to fully understand how the instructions of Nimai 
Pandit recorded above could produce in such a critically minded, sincere 
soul complete and instantaneous faith in all the Statements of the Lord. 

The dogmatic empiricists will object to this on the ground that it is dogmatism 
to which he professes to be opposed in theory. But without further wasting 
our time on these shameless hypocrites, whose folly has already been 
sufficiently exposed, it would be far better to try to understand how Nimai 



Pandit Himself was free from all such hypocritical dogmatism. 


What Nimai Pandit said is this: “Tapan Misra should constantly repeat the maha 
mantra. The maha mantra, consists of sixteen Names and thirty-two letters of 
the Alphabet. The maha mantra., although it is technically in the form of Name 
and not of mantra, yet possesses all the potency of the mantra.. The Names in 
the case of address in their Sanskrit form, constituting the maha mantra., have 
the following order: Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare; 
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama; Rama, Hare Hare. This maha mantra is to be 
constantly recited. There is no condition. The real meaning of the method and 
object of spiritual endeavour, laid down in the Shastras, would appear 
spontaneously after the process had been followed to the point when the first 
tender shoots of spiritual love for the Divinity made their appearance.” 

This is a very simple creed which also does not apparently rest on the rational 
basis. A string of names is to be uttered continuously. How could this apparently 
non-rational advice fully satisfy Tapan Misra? 

The whole answer in a nutshell is this. It is so because Tapan Misra submitted to 
receive the Truth from the Supreme Lord. The Substantive Truth 
is communicated by the Power of Mercy of the Lord. He cannot be reached by 
the uphill effort of the empiric mind. It is no doubt true that Sree 
Chaitanyadeva subsequently described to this same Tapan Misra in greater detail 
this very subject. That Discourse is all-important and will appear in this work in 
its proper place. It will suffice for the present to observe that the 
process recommended is different from the magical art. The result promised is 
the knowledge of the right method and object of spiritual endeavour discussed 
in the pages of the vast literature of the Shastras. Magic produces, and promises 
to produce, a temporary delusion. Even when magic seems to produce 
a comparatively lasting result it is also not spiritual in the rational sense of 
the philosophers. The cure of a disease of the seeming increase of the scope 
or power of the senses and the mind, in regard to their relation with the objects 
of this phenomenal world limited by the conditions of time and space, are 
not spiritual results according to any school. Those who are inattentive to 
the distinction between the Real Truth and changing hypotheses, between 
the spiritual and the material, are likely to confound the maha mantra with 
a magical formula. It is necessary to avoid this possible misconception. 

All that can be reasonably urged at this stage is that the proposition is stated but 



is not supported by any form of argument or elucidation. The answer is that the 
discussion is deliberately postponed to enable the Narrative to develop to that 
point at which it will be practicable to resume the further consideration of the 
subject in this form. Meanwhile the conversation of Nimai Pandit with Tapan 
Misra and its effect on the latter may be accepted as a most wonderful event 
which actually took place but which does not explain itself. 

Of course nothing is impossible with the Lord. The empiric dogmatist is not, 
however, satisfied, or profess to be dissatisfied, unless an effort is made 
to consider all subjects from the point of view of our limited reason which 
is confessedly unfit to find out the Real Truth. Such inconclusive discussions 
by the method of begging the question to be proved, also pretend to carry 
our knowledge of the subjects so discussed further in the direction of the 
Truth. Such discussions undoubtedly serve to direct our attention to all the 
superficial and misleading aspects of a subject. We gather much information by 
its means, which is of a negative, character and falls within the limited scope 
permitted to our present mental faculties. Such knowledge is applicable to 
our circumstances of the phenomenal world and enables us to a more or less 
extent to obtain the fulfillment of our worldly purposes. This is the principle 
of worldly utility. It need neither be belittled nor ignored. It is effective in its 
way. But the attainment of a worldly result is no help in the process 
of understanding the Absolute i.e., the spiritual or real and abiding nature of 
those very phenomena. For that purpose they require to be looked at from the 
point of view of the Absolute Truth. The Lord alone can communicate the 
spiritual understanding which enables us to know the Absolute Truth. Once we 
have been enabled to attain the absolute standpoint we are in a position to 
really share in the discourse about the Absolute Truth which is the subject-matter 
of the Shastras. The Lord may adopt any method to communicate to us 
this spiritual enlightenment. There is nothing surprising in regard to the 
Activities of the Lord. But at the same time the Lord does nothing that is not 
also perfectly rational in the only true sense. We are, therefore, justified in trying 
to find out not the empiric but the absolute rationale of the Lord’s Teachings. 

We shall revert to this subject in its proper place. 

Tapan Misra was, however, convinced that he had at last found out the Truth of 
Whom he was in search. He made repeated prostrated obeisances to the 
Lord Who now directed him to proceed to Benares without delay where the 
Lord promised to meet him again and impart the knowledge regarding the 
detailed principles of the method and Object of worship. The reader is now in a 



position to distinguish between the connected processes of the exposition of 
the principles of spiritual endeavour and imparting of spiritual enlightenment. 

Misra was not advised to repeat the mahamantra mechanically. Such a piece of 
advice gratis could not have satisfied a real inquirer like Tapan Misra. He 
was satisfied because he was enlightened by the Grace of the Lord as regards 
the substantive existence of the subjects of his inquiry. Such causeless 
occurrences ordinarily go by the names of miracle and magic. But we should be 
careful to remember that the Performances of the Lord are not miraculous in the 
sense of being unintelligible nor magical in the sense of being delusive. They 
are spiritual that is intelligible to the perfect judgment of the enlightened 
soul although wholly incomprehensible to the limited reason of the soul with 
a predilection for the bound state. There is, of course, no question of delusion. 

Tapan Misra was spiritually enlightened by the Grace of the Lord; or, in other 
words, the perfect judgment of the emancipated soul was re-established in 
him. He was, therefore, in the position to understand the Reality of the Teaching 
of the Lord. The emancipated soul functions in a strictly subordinate 
capacity. Such a soul does not try to know anything by his own ascending effort. 
He simply waits to be enlightened. This may appear to be like total loss 
of initiative. But it is really the attainment of the true initiative. The 
enlightened soul is able to distinguish between the results obtainable by the 
process of the so-called initiative possible for the intellect that seeks its own 
gratification and the corresponding faculty of the free soul willingly seeking the 
Gratification of Krishna. The initiative exists in both cases. But the power is 
abused in one case and used properly in the other. It is necessary to lead a 
healthy life. It is also necessary to understand the principles of the Medical 
Science for the purpose of being enabled to preserve one’s health. It is 
meaningless to want to understand the principles for any other purpose. It is the 
only function of the free soul to serve the Truth. But the Absolute Truth is not a 
general formula, still less an abstraction. The Absolute Truth is a Real Person 
with Perfect Initiative and Perfect Will. The so called abstract truth, being a 
figment of our defective imagination, is really a dead thing which cannot be our 
master. The Absolute Truth, because He happens to be the Real Person with Will 
of His Own Who is not identical with our wills, can really command and be 
really obeyed. The only function of the pure soul is to obey the Highest Person. 

It is possible to suppose that we realize the nature of the spiritual service when it 
is presented to us in the form of an abstract discussion like the present one. But 
the conditioned soul can never realize the nature of spiritual service merely by 



the process of such discussion, because he has as yet no substantive experience 
of the spiritual existence. The Truth cannot be experienced by the material 
senses or the materialized mind. He can only be experienced by the spiritual 
senses and the spiritual mind. Tapan Misra found his spiritual senses and his 
spiritual mind by the Grace of the Lord. This settled his doubts regarding the 
substantive existence, nature, and object of spiritual endeavor. He was, therefore, 
no longer in need of the knowledge of the principles of such endeavour. But a 
discussion of the principles from the Lips of the Lord Himself was necessary for 
the negative enlightenment of unemancipated souls. 

The Lord then embraced Tapan Misra. This produced horripilation all over the 
frame of the Brahmana due to the manifestation of spiritual ecstatic love 
that binds all individual (Jiva ) souls with the Feet of the Lord. The Brahmana, 
on receiving the favour of the Embrace of the Lord of Vaikuntha, then 
experienced for the first time the real spiritual bliss. At the time of taking his 
leave he unbosomed to the Lord the details of his dream. On hearing his story 
the Lord observed that it was true as far as it was proper and reasonable; but he 
must not tell all this to any other person., The Lord repeated this warning once 
more with earnestness. He then stood up smiling on the arrival of the 
auspicious moment of His Departure for Home. In this manner Lord Gauranga 
Sree-Hari prepared to return Home after glorifying the country of Vanga by His 
Presence on her soil. The Lord reached Home in the evening with a great 
quantity of valuables in the shape of money and costly objects which He had 
brought as presents from East Bengal. 

The Lord made prostrated obeisances to the feet of His mother and made over to 
her all the treasures that He had brought and immediately proceeded with His 
disciples to the Ganges to bathe in the holy stream. The mother, stricken at heart, 
without delay busied herself in preparations for cooking His meal with the help 
of other members of the family. The Lord, Teacher of all persons by His Own 
Example, prostrated Himself in obeisance to the Ganges in many ways. He 
sported in the water of the Ganges for a while. The Lord returned Home after 
having obtained the sight of the Ganges and bathed in her water. Then after duly 
performing the daily worship; Lord Gauranga Sree-Hari sat down to His meal. 
The Lord of Vaikuntha, having dined to satisfaction, seated Himself at the 
doorstep of Vishnu’s Shrine. 


By this time all relatives and friends came to accost Him and sat on. all sides 
round the Lord. The Lord, talking to all in a smiling and jocular manner, 



told them how pleasantly He had passed His days in East Bengal. Mimicking 
the mode of speech of East Bengal the Lord laughingly caricatured the people 
of that country. His friends did not say anything about the disappearance of 
Sree Lakshmi Devi, being aware that such communication would produce 
sadness. After a short stay all the friends took their leave of Him. The Lord sat in 
the same position continuing to chew the betel, indulging in light talk, 
laughter and jokes. 

Sree Sachi Devi was staying away inside the room. She did not come before her 
Son. The Lord Himself now went up to His mother and found that 
her countenance was overcast with an expression of deep dejection. The 
Lord greeted His mother with sweet words. He inquired about the cause of her 
grief complaining that on His return from a distant land instead of welcoming 
Him with special gladness she had chosen to wear the appearance of mourning 
and pressed to know the reason of her sadness. On hearing these words of her 
Son the mother burst into tears holding down her face and remained speechless 
in her distress. The Lord told her that He understood everything.'" Some evil 
must have befallen her daughter-in-law. At this all who were present informed 
the Lord that His Spouse had, indeed obtained the mercy of the holy Ganges. 

Lord Gauranga Sree-Hari on being told of the departure of Sree Lakshmi Devi, 
His Consort, paused for a brief space holding down His Head. As a confession of 
grief at separation from His beloved, the Life of all the Vedas remained silent for 
a while. 

After indulging His Grief in this matter for a brief space, in imitation of the ways 
of the people of this world, the Lord repeated with a patient mind this sloka of 
the Bhagavatam, ‘Who are, indeed, these husbands, sons, and relatives? Whose 
relations are they? It is all due to ignorant delusion? 

The Lord continued to speak, ‘Mother, why do you feel sad? How can that which 
is pre-ordained be canceled Such is the march of Time. No one belongs to 
anybody. It is for this reason that the Vedas declare this world to 
be impermanent. The whole world is under the Dominion of the Lord. Who 
else can bring about either union or severance? Therefore what has happened 
has been by the Will of the Lord. Where is the use of grieving for what is past? 

Is there anyone who is more fortunate than that departed person of pious 
deeds who has attained the mercy of the Ganges before the Disappearance of 
Her Husband? Consoling His mother in this way the Lord turned His Mind to 



His other duties in the company of his friends and relatives. On hearing 
these words of nectarine sweetness from the Holy Lips of the Lord all persons 
were fully relieved of every cause of grief. 

We are accustomed to expect something altogether new and strange and wholly 
different from everything with which we are now so familiar, on 
being spiritually enlightened. This accounts for our contempt for the homely 
and familiar events of our present everyday life. We expect to find the life of 
saints to be something miraculous and abnormal. This is due to want of clear 
thinking that leads us to confound the super-natural with the unnatural. We have 
not to travel through all the vastness of space in order to arrive at Vaikuntha. We 
fall into this world as soon as our spiritual vision is obscured. The same 
Vaikuntha is then reflected in a most unwholesome manner in the mirrors of our 
hearts. All that is necessary in order to get rid of the misery of the worldly 
bondage, is to cleanse the mirror of the heart to enable Vaikuntha to appear to us 
in the undistorted form. This function few of us consider it worth our while to 
set about in right earnest. We want to reach Vaikuntha by extending the scope 
of our wrong activities. But so long as the heart remains unchanged the 
prospect does not undergo any material change. The whole question is this— 
‘Are we seriously desirous of knowing the Truth ? Are we prepared for a change 
of heart to accomplish this ? 

This is hastily supposed to imply the call for the abdication of all functions of 
this world. If wife and children have not to be ‘loved,(?) we are 
naturally shocked by the requisition. It would be easier to part from them for 
good which is happening to soldiers and sailors any day of their lives. But that 
does not make them spiritual, as we know from experience. It is the humdrum 
duties of the average householder which hang round our necks like the 
proverbial millstone and require to be ‘enlivened’ by the relieving process of 
separation, heroism, death, calamities or the like. Without these latter life would 
be unbearable. The question on the threshold of the spiritual life is not how 
to retain, or get rid of, the activities that we already have, in a more effective 
or striking manner. Such an attitude involves a forgone conclusion. How can 
a temporary thing be retained effectively ? How can an actual thing be got rid 
of without mangling ourselves? The runaway as well as the preservative 
methods are alike futile and irrational. But they happen to be the only ones that 
the resources of our present imagination can suggest for our relief. No 
third alternative is at present conceivable to us. 



That a person, who is acting exactly like ourselves in this very world and with 
whom we ourselves have most intimate relations, should have to be 
considered as being altogether different in his outlook and behaviour from 
ourselves, is difficult to understand or to admit. All that we may be prepared to 
allow is that he is different from us in the same way as any two persons are 
different from one another. The esoteric explanation is not of much use either 
in understanding or in dealing with any person who is also apparently found 
to belong to this world in the ordinary sense. If a person calling himself 
or allowing himself to be called a Vaishnava have to be allotted a 
privileged position, that does not accord with the requirements of our common 
sense, simply on the basis of such esoteric explanations, there would presently 
be no necessity for the exercise of common sense at all in any affair of life. 

These are the two poles of the empiric attitude. It expects either magic or 
wholesale surrender to the so-called common sense. It professes the latter, 
as being the more workable of the two. What change, if any, it accordingly asks, 
is proposed to be effected in its attitude by the transcendentalists? 

Sree Gaursundar goes to East Bengal to earn wealth by teaching the people. 

This is quite intelligible and natural from the common sense point of view. 

After His return from there He finds that His wife had had a sudden and 
untimely end. But He is not upset by the information and calmly consoles 
His stricken mother. This is also quite sensible and nothing extraordinary. It 
is ordinarily done under similar circumstances by many other persons 
whose doings are allowed to pass unnoticed, by the ordinary rules of common 
sense. If there be an esoteric meaning behind all this, which was denied by many 
of His contemporaries at the time of their occurrence, what difference will it 
make in our conduct if we refuse to take any notice of the same? . We would 
behave in the same, or sometimes may be in a better way in similar circumstance 
by the guidance of our common sense without troubling about any supposed 
spiritual implication. 

Life in Vaikuntha resembles life in this world, but it does not interest the people 
of this world. In Vaikuntha there are far more attractive objects of enjoyment 
than we find in this world and in an absolutely and fully accessible form; but no 
one there enjoys or discards them. This is opposed to the so-called common 
sense of the people of this world. The common sense of this world tells us both 



to enjoy and to discard. The common sense of Vaikuntha tells one to do neither. 
The Vaishnavas are endowed with the common sense of Vaikuntha The esoteric 
explanation is the only real explanation of their conduct which is based on a 
different common sense, in the same way as the esoteric explanation is the only 
explanation that is ordinarily given of the conduct of the people of this world. 

If it is asked, ‘Do the Vaishnavas want to be guided by the common sense of 
Vaikuntha, which is claimed to be different from the common sense of 
this world, in their dealings with the people o£ this world?’ The reply is both 
‘yes’ and ‘no’. They behave towards one another unambiguously and in 
accordance with the common sense of Vaikuntha. Towards the people of this 
world they behave in accordance with the common sense of this world which is, 
however, perfectly amenable to the common sense of Vaikuntha. So there need 
not be any quarrel over the matter on the part of the advocates of common sense 
in its worldly sense. 

The only difficulty is that ordinary common sense, being based on the malicious 
selfish desire for sensuous well-being of-oneself, leaves all our problem of 
existence really unsolved; nay, it actually aggravates the evil of a perpetual state 
of joyless discord. Our common-sense is sound in essence but misguided in 
practice by the fell disease of hankering for selfish transitory enjoyment. The 
little acts of everyday life would be endowed with the perfection of Vaikuntha if 
only a real change of attitude could be brought about. This is wholly beyond the 
powers of our mind to conceive, and it is not possible for us to fill in every detail 
of the scheme of life led in Vaikuntha by means of our poor, corrupt imagination. 

Every activity of Vaikuntha is productive of more really lasting good and 
happiness than all the hollow mummeries of the whole range of activities of this 
accursed world. Sree Gaursundar apparently led a most ordinary kind of life as 
householder. Later he led the ordinary life of a sannyasin. But Both 
were actually lived on the plane of Vaikuntha. The Narrative of His Life and 
its apparently ordinary common-place events acquaint us with the archetype of 
the actual life led by absolutely pure souls in the Realm of Vaikuntha. The 
esoteric meaning is the real meaning of such a life. The esoteric meaning of the 
worldly life is a contradiction in terms. But all entities of this world are capable 
of being used properly if they are employed in the service of the Absolute Truth. 
In order to attain that point of view we must try to act up to the common sense 
of Vaikuntha. 



If we choose to lead a worldly life we can never obtain a glimpse of that 
transcendental subject. It is not by ‘digesting’ or ‘lecturing’ on the 
Vedanta Philosophy that spiritual enlightenment is attainable. There are 
unfortunately many clever exponents of the Vedanta in this country and abroad 
who have done no appreciable good either to themselves or to others by their 
vanities. 

The Life and Teachings of Sree Gaursundar are worth most careful perusal 
because They raise at every step the gravest issues discussed in the Vedanta, 
in their concrete, living form. All exposition of the Vedanta has to conform to 
the Life of Sree Chaitanya before it can be accepted as really True. This is 
the relation between the two. In this case we have to do with the Actual 
Reality, while in the case of ordinary worldly Pandits we have to deal with the 
laboured non-sense of corrupt humbugs who really know nothing of their 
subject. The mere mechanical perusal of the Genuine Account of the Life of Sree 
Chaitanya is productive of incalculable good, in as much as it presents to us in a 
concrete and uncontroversial form the problem of spiritual living. After we have 
read the Life of Sree Chaitanya we understand that it is possible for a devotee to 
lead the life of Vaikuntha before our very eyes without our being aware of the 
same; and, what is more to the point, that it is possible for us also to lead such a 
life in this world without really disturbing anybody. 

Sree Gaursundar exhibited the Leela of being smitten with grief on receiving the 
first intimation of the Departure of His Consort from this world. Sree Sachi Devi 
was apparently, very much grieved by the loss of her Daughter-in-law. Grief at 
the sad demise of beloved ones is natural and inevitable in the case of the people 
of this world. There is also grief in Vaikuntha but there it is a particularly 
delicious variety of uninterruptible happiness. The reason of this we gather from 
the Words of Sree Gaursundar addressed to His mother to console her. All grief 
is due to forgetfulness of the fact that no one is either parent, child, wife or 
husband, of any other person. Therefore, there can really be no such thing as 
bereavement which is experienced by reason of our ignorance of the Truth. 

But are we, therefore, justified in neglecting our ordinary duties towards our dear 
and near relatives? This way of stating, the question is misleading. People of this 
world are exposed to joys and griefs on account of their friends and relatives. 
These joys and griefs are of a transitory and unwholesome nature. Their 
transitoriness as well as unwholesomeness are due to a 
fundamental misconception of the events which are their cause. After the 



misconception is removed we may or may not continue to have any dealings 
with our relatives and friends as such. The devotee makes no distinction between 
these two states. He may or may not continue his intimate relationship with 
friends and relatives. He is guided by the resolve, of doing nothing except the 
Bidding of Sree Krishna. If by the Will of Krishna he lives as a householder he is 
careful to discharge his ordinary duties towards the members of his family but 
without confounding the transitory with the eternal. The transitory cannot be 
ignored. But it need not, therefore, be regarded as identical with the permanent 
verity. On the contrary the transitory is capable of being turned to the account of 
the permanent interest of a person if he makes the former strictly subordinate 
and conformable to the requirements of the latter. This will not necessarily 
make much appreciable outward difference in the conduct of such a person 
towards anybody, except occasionally under the necessity of being loyal to the 
spiritual standpoint. But his object and outlook will be nevertheless 
necessarily altogether different from theirs and it would be convenient to 
preserve an attitude of unsuspected reserve about the real reason of difference, 
especially when no useful purpose is likely to be served by its disclosure to 
unappreciative people. This is no culpable duplicity as it implies preference for 
Truth as against untruth and a more effective desire to serve Him. It is no doubt 
possible to live a straight-forward and professed spiritual life even in this world. 
But this may not always be effective in inducing worldly people to follow the 
Truth. It is one of the most strange things about spiritual life that one who leads 
such a life can do good to all by finding a way to associate everybody with 
himself in his spiritual activities. The form of this connection will not be the 
same in, all cases not because the tastes and capacities of people vary but 
because Krishna is 

Autocrat. It is not to serve worldly people that a devotee willingly lays himself 
under the obligation imposed by the Truth, of humouring their weaknesses 
in order to exploit those very weaknesses for the service of the Truth. Those 
who are not in the secret are likely to find fault with such apparent lapses from 
the ideal (?) of straightforward worldly conduct, Such lapses should also by 
no means be imitated by any body. But they constitute the service of the 
Lord possible in this world. 

Sree Gaursundar and Sree Sachi Devi were however, acting truly in grieving at 
the Departure of Sree Lakshmi Devi. They did not grieve like worldly 
people. The devotees of the Lord are most intimately tied to one another by 
reason of their association in the common service of the Lord. There is no 



question of the physical body or the materialized mind in such relationship, nor 
any desire for sensuous gratification of themselves. But Sree Krishna can be 
served by and through all forms of relationship and distinctive manifestations 
which only serve to increase the charm and diversity of spiritual service. The 
only thing needful is to avoid self forgetfulness and not to suppose oneself to be 
any other than the exclusive servant of Krishna. 



Chapter 15 Marriage with Sree Vishnupriya Devi 


The Lord continued to indulge in the sweet taste of learning and thereby 
prevented any one from understanding His Real Nature. He bathed early in 
the morning in the Ganges and, after performing His morning worship, made 
His way to the house of Mukunda Sanjaya, the father of Purushottamdas. 

After the Lord had taken His Seat in the Chandimandap of Mukunda Sanjaya 
His students would turn up one by one. If any of them by chance appeared 
without the tilaka mark on his forehead on any day the Lord sent him back home 
observing ‘that the forehead of a Brahmana without the tilaka resembles the 
charnel ground being proof that he has not performed his worship of that day., 
Thus the Lord took care that all His students strictly followed the injunctions of 
the Shastras in all particulars. 

The making of the tilaka mark on twelve different limbs of the body is 
prescribed by the Shastras as the indispensable duty of every Brahmana. 

The tilaka is made with the earth of holy ground sanctified by its association 
with the Lord or His devotees. It is to be made in the form of a line pointing 
upwards with all aperture running from the base to the top to represent the 
Temple of the Lord. The horizontal tilaka which is technically called tripundra, 
is forbidden to Brahmanas who are candidates for the study of the Veda. 

The tripundra is deprecated as being the mark of a non-Brahmana. The tripundra 
is worn by those who claim to be themselves Narayana. The urdhapundra or 
the upward tilaka is worn by those who regard themselves as the servants 
of Vishnu. No one who is not a Vaishnava can be a true Brahmana. Access to 
the Veda is closed to a person who does not recognize the superiority of 
the servants of Vishnu. The non-Brahmana do not admit the eternal superiority 
of the spiritual preceptor. They are sudras. They paint on their forehead 
the tripundra sign symbolizing their identity with Godhead. This is the most 
deadly of sins and accordingly it is laid down that if one meets by chance a 
Brahmana ( ?) wearing the tripundra mark, he must forthwith bathe with all his 
clothes on, in order to be purged of the pollution caused by the unholy sight. 

There is really no worship for one who refuses on principle to recognize the 
eternal superiority of the Lord. Those who do not worship the Lord are sudras. 
On the other hand it is the bounden duty of every Brahmana, who is a servant of 
the Lord, to worship Him daily. Unless this is strictly complied with no one must 



be admitted to the status of a student of the Vedas. Those, who demur to the 
stringency of such regulations on the pleas of liberalism and toleration, suppose 
that education freely imparted produce a change of heart even of those who 
behave improperly through sheer perversity. It is also assumed that secular 
knowledge, which is capable of being irregularly acquired, is necessarily better 
than secular ignorance. Nimai Pandit was the Teacher of Vyakarana which forms 
the primary course of study that has to be gone through by every student of 
secular learning. Nimai Pandit did not admit into His Grammar-class anyone 
who had not performed his daily worship of Vishnu and had not painted his 
forehead with the mark of the upward tilaka. 

Should this be regarded as intolerant? It is no doubt a proposal to ban all 
education not based on the true religion professed by a Brahmana. Nimai Pandit 
did not say that non-Brahmanas were to be banished or suppressed forcibly. 
Atheism has always flourished in this world and is the creed more or less of the 
vast majority, nay strictly speaking, of almost all persons, of this world. It is the 
paramount duty of every God-fearing man to try his best to help in reducing this 
appalling volume of atheism. Secular education happens to be such by reason of 
its total dissociation from religion. It is the outcome of the open atheistic 
attitude. The pseudo-Vaishnavas are masked atheists and are also advocates and 
apologists of spurious liberalism, compromise and willing toleration of all forms 
of unspiritual conduct. The highest devotees are tolerant for a different reason. 

To the devotee the Truth is the only Object of worship and he does not recognize 
any value of any method separated from the Object. According to current 
empiric Ethics the method and the object must be severally moral. In other 
words the method of the empiric thinker is not identical with the object. Grave 
harm is apprehended by empiricists if this vital and salutary difference between 
method and object, insisted upon by empiric morality, is ignored. This is one of 
the elementary principles of empiric ethics and need not be laboured. This 
separation between method and object does not exist in spiritual conduct. For 
example toleration is considered by empiric ethics as a good principle by itself. 
At any rate they expect that every consideration should be given to it in coming 
to any decision in regard to really ethical conduct. If it is necessary to be 
intolerant under any circumstances, and such contingence is by no means 
impossible nor rare in practice, the necessity itself is regarded by empiric ethics 
as an evil which is unavoidable in the present imperfect conditions of this world. 
Empiric morality is thus perpetually reduced to the form of unprincipled 
compromise between the principles of hypocritical good and necessary evil, 
which is regarded as undesirable in theory but unavoidable in practice. Nay it 



even recommends as our duty to adopt any compromise, however objectionable, 
which may be necessitated by an impartial consideration of the specific 
circumstances of each case. But as there is no such necessity for compromise on 
the spiritual plane the difficulty does not exist and the method there is always 
identical with the object. The apparent intolerance displayed by Sree Gaursundar 
towards novices on the spiritual path is not a necessary evil, a departure under 
pressure of circumstances from the standard of the absolute good, but the perfect 
good itself. 

It is necessary to consider this vital point a little more in detail. Why is empiric 
ethics under the necessity of viewing the method of an activity as separate 
from its object? Because it is not possible, circumstanced as we are at present, 
to understand the whole purpose of any person. A practical code of conduct, 
the formulation of which is the object of empiric ethics, therefore seeks to 
correct our unavoidably imperfect knowledge of the complete, the whole 
purpose of another by providing a confessedly imperfect safeguard by attaching 
a presumptive value to the external features of an act, attempting to join 
method and object in a separable combination to obtain a rule of conduct which 
at best possesses only a negative value. In the case of the Absolute Truth 
the obstructive circumstances are altogether absent. Absolute knowledge is 
perfect knowledge. Conduct issuing from such knowledge has no separable 
external features that belong even to the so called ethical conduct of this world. 
The conduct proceeding from perfect knowledge possesses the perfection of 
its source. This is not all. This perfection is unattainable on the material 
plane, whereas it is natural and inevitable on the spiritual plane. On the spiritual 
plane the object and method of conduct are alike spiritual. The objects, with 
which we have to deal on the spiritual plane, are themselves spiritual, that is to 
say, capable of communicating the knowledge of their real nature to us. 

This establishes that perfect unity between method-and object which is denoted 
by the term identity, if we want to express it by the nearest material analogy. 

It is only if we bear in mind this categorical difference between ethical and 
spiritual conduct that we would be enabled to avoid the blunder of 
judging spiritual conduct by the empiric ethical ( ?) standard. And it should also 
be possible for us to understand the perfect validity of the contention that 
conduct that is sanctioned by the spiritual test, is the only truly ethical conduct 
even as regards also its external appearance. In consequence of this rational 
conviction such pseudo-ethical fetishes as the so-called principles of toleration, 
chastity, truthfulness, etc., etc., professed to be worshipped by empiric ethics, 



cease to impress or frighten and can even be discarded without any chance of 
being overtaken by those dire immoral consequences which they are utterly 
unable to prevent or modify. 

The question of the spiritual value of any external 'symbol’ has been confidently 
decided by empiric thought against the claimant of such value on grounds which 
that science is equally at a loss to explain. This point has already been treated in 
another part of the present narrative. It will suffice to say here that the regulation 
of the connection between the material world and the spiritual, if it is to be at all 
properly performed, must be placed wholly under the jurisdiction of the latter. 
That the human body is the temple of the Lord may appear to be no more than a 
‘symbol’ to the empiricist who really understands by ‘symbol’ as indicating what 
is not wholly non-existent. But if the empiricist really cares for his own logic he 
should call the wholly abstract as also the symbol of the non-existent and vice 
versa. The spiritual is neither concrete nor abstract mundanity. It is quite 
different from the concrete and abstract of our mental speculation, both of which 
are perverted deluding reflections of the Substantive Truth. The abstract which 
the empiricist is pleased to call spiritual for reasons which he cannot explain, is 
really only the abstract of the relative and is situated at the furthest distance from 
the Absolute Reality. The spiritual is neither the concrete gross matter nor the 
abstract speculation about gross matter. This world, although it seems to have 
an existence of its own, has really no independent substantive existence. 

The impersonal or abstract worship, which the empiricist is so anxious to 
provide, is a figment of his perverted imagination and has no substantive 
existence even at its source. He is himself only a pseudo-symbolist and his 
condemnation of improper symbolization applies really to himself. It is for the 
deliverance of such blundering pseudo-symbolists from the clutches of this fatal 
form of delusion that the process of worship enjoined by the Shastras have been 
laid down by those who are themselves free from such delusion. 

The tilaka mark is no doubt a symbol. But it is a symbol of the Reality to Whom 
we have no access at present except by means of the real symbol. This symbol 
is intended, and authorized, to arouse the consciousness of the Reality in 
those who are at present devoid of the same. Those who oppose the symbol on 
the ground that it does not correspond, like their own unreal symbols, to 
the perverted, deluding shadow of the Truth, are only worshippers of the 
changing symbol of untruth. The pseudo-symbolists have, indeed, no objection 
to decorate their gross physical bodies with all manner of symbols of this 
material world, conceived by them as being the only Reality, an assumption 



which effectively prevents all realization of the very existence of the spiritual 
symbol. 


It is rational to try to demolish this suicidal idolatry by substituting in the place 
of the worship of the symbols of this world the real symbol of the 
most fundamental fact of the world of the soul, viz., that Godhead in His True 
Form does not in-dwell the physical body or the materialized mind, but has 
His Eternal Abode in the pure consciousness of the immaculate soul who, in 
his natural position, is free from all connection with matter and who is our 
only real self. 

Forgetfulness of our true self is perpetuated by any arrangement that is based 
upon confusion of the physical body and the materialized mind with the soul 
or self proper. The decorations naturally coveted by the physical body at 
the instance of the renegade mind entangles the soul in the meshes of 
worldly wants. The only decoration of the Temple of Godhead is Godhead 
Himself. But neither His Temple nor Godhead Himself, 

Who dwells therein, are symbols of shadows as the empiricists want us to 
believe, but the Reality Himself Who possesses the qualities of self- 
conscious, personal and eternal existence which is His perfectly consistent 
logical connotation. 

Candidates for the knowledge of the Truth must be required to prove their bona 
fide before they are admitted into the Academy of the Truth. This is also imitated 
by the empiricists in admitting students to institutions of empiric knowledge. 
Secular learning, sedulously divorced from spiritual living, is responsible for all 
the miseries of this world. He is a bad physician who hopes to cure his patient by 
allowing the disease to be aggravated by deliberate and persistent mal-treatment. 
It is the duty of the wise physician to act on the less enterprising maxim that the 
readiness to prevent is always better than effecting a cure. The uncompromising 
intolerance of mal-treatment fully represents the principle of toleration by its 
regard for the Absolute Truth. Real toleration may be defined as extreme 
partiality for the Truth. Toleration and partiality are equally good when they are 
exercised on behalf of the Truth and are utterly condemnable and terribly 
mischievous when they are made to serve untruth. 

The Lord evinced a very particular pleasure in tearing to pieces and exposing 
mercilessly the pedantic defects of everybody. 



One of His favourite Pastimes consisted in caricaturing the language of the 
people of Sylhet and East Bengal. The infuriated Sylhetese retorted to the 
jokes of the Renegade Son of a Sylhetese by emphatically reminding the 
irascible Tormentor of His Own Lineage, telling Him that He Himself, both His 
parents, in fact every one of His family, belonged to Sylhet. ‘What sense could 
there be 5 , they demanded with a natural indignation, ‘on the part of such a 
Person to get up a hypocritical condemnation of what also equally concerned 
Himself. But the Lord was not to be denied His Pastimes by any manner of 
argument to the contrary and His jocular propensity only increased by every 
effort to convince Him of its mischievous and self-condemnatory nature. The 
Lord, indeed, carried the joke to most unseemly lengths, till at last the angry 
Sylhetese, losing all patience, grasped at the skirts of the cloth worn by the Lord 
and dragged Him many a day. to the King’s Court to have Him punished by the 
law. The friends of the Lord could extricate Him from the clutches of the law on 
such occasions only by the greatest, exertions. The Lord was equally 
unreasonable towards East Bengal people. He would lie in wait for an 
opportunity, and take to His Heels after breaking the Bangali’s begging bowl of 
dried gourd. 

The Lord, even while He was following the responsible occupation of Teacher, 
displayed an irrepressible disposition for every kind of prank, with one and only 
one remarkable exception. He kept strictly aloof from all association with, or 
talk about, women. The Lord never looked at women, even by a side- 
glance. ‘Whence, says Thakur Brindavandas, all eminent persons avoid praising 
Lord Gauranga by describing Him as Amorous Lover. Because although every 
kind of praise is applicable to the Lord yet the wise sing only what is appropriate 
in regard to the Distinctive Nature of the Subject of their praise.’ 

Against this clear warning, conveyed by Sree Brindavandas Thakur, who is the 
only authority universally recognized by the followers of Sree Chaitanya 
in regard to the Activities of the Lord during the period of His Householder 
Life, there has nevertheless sprung up a definite school which calls itself 
the community of the Gaur-Nagaris (i.e., sweet-hearts of Gaur) on the 
ostensible ground that Gaursundar is identical with Sree Krishna, and, therefore, 
the inner meaning of His Activities, according to this school, must also be the 
same as the obvious meaning of the Leela of Sree Krishna. Such a view is 
opposed to the Lacts of the Narrative described in this work, as also to the 
specific and explicit testimony of Thakur Brindavandas regarding the practice of 
the most eminent devotees. The doctrine, therefore, seems to be a concoction of 



the brains of persons who allow their sensuous imaginations to carry them off 
their legs even in a matter which lies wholly beyond the reach of our material 
senses. To such temperaments the Activities of Sree Gaursundar, both as 
Householder and Sannyasin, must ever remain utterly unintelligible. The only 
course, that is open to them for getting rid of their error, is to practice 
unconditional submission at the feet of the transcendental seers and to cherish 
absolute faith in the truth of their words. Our ribald imagination has no place in 
the Spiritual sphere. The ordinary rules of empiric history strictly subordinate the 
function of imagination to reasoning based on dependable evidence. In forming 
the true idea of the Personality of Sree Chaitanya it will serve no useful purpose 
to ignore alike the method of empiric as well as that of spiritual history. The 
latter requires the imagination to be subordinated to Scriptural evidence recorded 
by the Acharyas. The Gaur-Nagaris are opposed to the Acharyas. They are 
also opposed to the ordinary method of empiric history. For these reasons 
they deserve no hearing either from historians or from those persons who follow 
the true method laid down in the Shastras. They may be appreciated only by 
those who want to turn sacred subjects into a means of their own 
sensuous gratification. 

It should be enough to remark in this connection that as a Householder Sree 
Gaursundar exhibited the Leela of leading the life of the ideal devotee, following 
the path of spiritual endeavour according to the rules laid down in the Shastras 
and in accordance of their meaning as expounded by the Acharyas. In the latter 
half of His Career the Lord put before us the model of the life led by a devotee 
who has attained the condition of amorous devotion to the Absolute. In both 
cases His example makes it necessary for us to give a wide berth to association 
with females as females in the direct or indirect manner. 

If it be asked how one is required to conduct himself towards females the answer 
that is furnished by the Life of Sree Gaursundar is that carnality in thought and 
deed is to be wholly avoided. We have already had an occasion to discuss this 
very point in connection with the marriage of Sree Lakshmi Devi with the Lord 
and in describing the relationship that existed between Her and Sree Gaursundar 
after the wedding. 

We must guard ourselves against the error of begging the question by assuming 
as an axiomatic truth the opinion that the race requires to be presented 
and propagated by cautious and systematic exercise of the sexual power. But this 
in itself need not be considered as necessary, or even as harmless when it 



is looked at from the absolute point of view. The race may cease to exist in 
spite of all our endeavour to preserve it. Where is the guarantee that the human 
race will endure for ever? If one protests against such discussion on the ground 
that it is profitless for man, such a person may be asked whether he is sure that 
he is eternally mortal. In discussing the absolute Truth it is necessary to 
avoid dogmatism prompted by the conditions under which we happen to live 
at present. Whenever any limit is set to any discussion by means of 
empiric dogmatism, it ceases to be applicable to the Absolute. Therefore, it is 
necessary not to pre-suppose the conclusion in a discussion of the Absolute. 

The race may lose the re-productive power or the Earth itself may be destroyed 
by a cosmic disturbance. The Absolute Truth should stand in all 
circumstances. Sree Gaursundar shows the method by which the Absolute Truth 
can be attained. We may attain to Him if we patiently listen to the story of His 
Life from the lips of those who themselves realize His true meaning, viz., from 
the Acharyas. There is no other way. The Gaur Nagaris follow their own 
unbridled imaginations and pretend to attain to the Absolute Truth by an 
intensive admiration for the mundane sexual activity and sexual thought. Such 
practice is wholly condemned by the Acharyas. The Acharyas refuse to accept 
the argument that the preservation of the human race is the object of human 
life. They are thus in a position to consider the value of perfect abstention 
from carnality, without prejudice. 

Birth, reproduction and death are the natural condition of all living things in this 
world. All other worldly functions are derivatives from these. The 
question before us is, whether it is our duty to perform these functions in the way 
that may appear to us to be most effective. This, as I have already pointed out, 
is really begging the question. We should rather ask, if we really want a 
solution of the problem, ‘Why are we reduced to the necessity of undergoing 
birth, life and death at all’? Once this point has been cleared up we should be 
able to understand what we have to do. 

The Shastras say that we are not subject to birth, nor death, but possess eternal 
life. It is not necessary for us to try to prolong a state of existence which is 
not our real life. On the contrary our duty is to get rid of ignorance and to attain 
to our true life which according to the Shastras is perfectly free from all 
ignorance and unwholesomeness. The eternal life is both real and attainable. It is 
not a figment of the deluding imagination. We should try to attain this eternal 
and perfect life by all means. It is also our duty to use our present perishable life 



for the attainment of the eternal life. The practice of mundane sexual act 
and sexual thought is the greatest obstacle in the way of our realization of 
the Absolute Truth. This is the teaching of Sree Chaitanya exemplified by His 
Own Life. The subject will he positively considered in connection with the 
nature of spiritual amour in a subsequent chapter of this work. 

Sexual act and sexual association in every form are definitely condemned. This 
fact should not be whittled down by explaining the word ‘stri’ as meaning 
all forms of worldly enjoyment or worldliness as a whole. The context does 
not support this otherwise plausible explanation. Sexuality has been 
specifically condemned. The question whether perfect freedom from carnality is 
possible in the married state, is beside the point. The sexual inclination may also 
be present without actually practicing the physical act. If the inclination itself 
is merely destroyed, it is tantamount to self-destruction. The real 
spiritual principle, corresponding to carnality, is not condemned. The 
present unwholesome perversion of outlook is sought to be remedied. Sex in 
the worldly sense is not valued, but at the same time the existence of the 
principle in the spirit is admitted. What is asserted is that there should be no 
confusion between sex in the material sense and the corresponding spiritual 
principle. 

The one stands in the way of the realization of the other. The complete 
elimination of mundane sexual act and thought is not the cause but the inevitable 
result of the attainment of the spiritual sex. The two can never coexist. In the 
spiritual the whole outlook is radically changed. It is not, therefore, possible to 
understand the nature of the married state of a Vaishnava without taking into 
account the whole position. It should be enough for our present purpose to state 
that the Vaishnava loves his wife or husband not as husband or wife but as the 
spiritual associate of his soul, which precludes the idea of the mundane sex. It Is 
not Platonic love, which is a figment of the imagination and has no substantive 
existence except by reference to mundane sex. The love, that joins together pure 
jiva souls, is not and cannot be carnality. Spiritual amour, in the case of the 
highest souls, is capable of being reciprocated only by Krishna Chandra Himself. 
The love that forms the bond of union between only the highest souls, is of the 
nature of affection that is experienced towards one another by the friendly 
confidantes of the Gracious Mistress of the One Amorous Hero. It is the 
Mistress’s delight which is absolutely and naturally preferred to one’s own and 
for the promotion of which one’s own spiritual inclination for amorous 
association with Krishna is wholly discarded not in the spirit of sacrifice but in 



the spirit of positive and real exercise of the highest natural instinct. All this falls 
flat on those who retain any trace of the taste for mundane sexuality. The 
purpose of the institution of marriage is fulfilled by the complete elimination of 
sexuality following on the associated pursuit of this spiritual end by the married 
couple. They must have no ideal of carnal connection as husband and wife. 
When this state has been realized the marriage tie ceases automatically to have 
any sexual import. The Vaishnava has no husband or wife except Sree Sree 
Radha.-Krishna. This is the necessary disappearance of the apparent on the 
appearance of the true self and the complete fulfillment of the spiritual instinct 
reflected in a perverted form in the principle of sex. 

The doubt, regarding the questionable kind of society that will result from the 
carrying out of the idea, troubles us only so long as we continue to confound the 
soul with the physical body. The soul is neither born nor does he die. When the 
soul realizes his own nature, his prospects are at once and radically changed. He 
begins to function on a different plane. The selfish and unwholesome ambition, 
that necessitated his incarceration in the house of correction of this world, 
naturally disappears on the attainment of other and purer ambitions and a larger 
vision. Those things which appear to be vital in this world, e.g., the preservation 
of the species by the exertion of the reproductive power, etc., etc., .are rendered 
unnecessary in the realm of the spirit, which is the real home of the eternal souls 
that are unborn and imperishable. 

The Lord continued to teach His pupils in the Chandi-Mandap of Mukunda 
Sanjaya. He sat there in the midst of His pupils expounding the Shastras, 
while medicinal oil, named after Vishnu, was applied to His Head by some 
favoured person, to afford relief to the nervous malady which it was His Pastime 
to manifest. He explained the texts in endless ways. The Lord taught His 
pupils from early morning till mid-day when He repaired to the Ganges to bathe. 
He was engaged till midnight everyday in teaching and helping His students 
to prepare their lessons. All those, who studied at the Feet of the Lord, 
became Pandits in course of the year by attaining the knowledge of the 
principles of the Shastras. This was the daily Life of Sree Chaitanyadeva as 
Professor. The Lord relished nothing except the sweet taste of learning. 

The view, that Sree Chaitanya was never in a perfectly sound state of mind, has 
been put forward by a few persons out of sheer malice and ignorance. 

The motive of such unfortunate people is to find, or even invent, a reason 
for proving their ignorance. If the brain of an insane Person be capable 



of supplying the clue to the Knowledge of the Reality to the sane ignorant 
persons of this world the latter need not neglect to be benefited thereby. 


Worldly people are never considered to be out of their proper senses by the 
Allopaths, Homeopaths, Hakims and Vaidyas of this world, who 
pride themselves on the infallibility of their power of diagnosing all kinds of 
mental and physical ailments. But if all worldly people are proved to be 
irrational and deluded should the Medical Sciences condescend to take serious 
notice of such aberration? Disease is one of the ordinary devices of the Deluding 
Power of Sree Chaitanya intended by His Mercy to shake the confidence of 
worldly people in the certainty and value of the pleasures derivable from the 
hallucinative workings of the medically sound (?) mind and body. A medically, 
sound mind in a medically sound body is the summum bonnum of the Medical 
Sciences. Is it altogether impossible for a sound mind in a sound body, which 
can pass the medical test, to be really utterly unsound (?) What else can be the 
cause of the impermanence of this particular form of the summum bonnum in the 
wise Providence of the All merciful? The Deluding Power tries to cure the 
spiritual malady of the conditioned souls by the device of the bodily and mental 
diseases which demonstrate conclusively the worthlessness and trivial nature of 
the ideal that promises to secure for the possessor of a sound mind in a 
sound body, an abundance of the so-called sensuous happiness obtainable in 
this world. But the lesson is lost on pedantic medical men whose horizon is 
straitly squeezed between the earth and sky of the body and mind utterly 
engrossed in the reckless pursuit of worldly enjoyment. But disease can for this 
reason neither terrify nor delude the pure soul of the Vaishnava. The nature of 
the malady of Sree Chaitanya, if rightly diagnosed on the lines indicated, has 
also the power of curing both the physicians and their patients of the 
spiritual disease of organized hypocrisy and self-deception willfully nursed by 
all worldly people which prevent them from knowing the Tmth by 
subjecting them to the mental delusions of the flesh. 

The Lord’s Marriage with Sree Vishnupriya Devi took place about this time. A 
detailed account of the event has been recorded by Thakur Sree 
Brindavandas. Before we enter upon those details it is necessary to dispose of 
certain considerations that may naturally arise in our minds in connection with 
this particular event. The Marriage of the Lord for a second time seems to 
require an imperative explanation. Strict monogamy on the part of both husband 
and wife is the highest ideal of marriage, as embodied in the Narrative of Sree 
Sree Rama Chandra and Seeta Devi. Conjugal love in the worldly sense also 



seems to be best guaranteed by such ideal which makes it the right-reserved of 
two particular persons to be the mutual recipients of connubial love. This alone, 
it is supposed, can make conjugal love both perfect and pure. According to 
this test Nimai Pandit, if He is to be regarded as an ideal Husband of His 
First Consort, should have abstained from marrying a second time. He can not 
be supposed to have been subject in an abnormal degree to this particular frailty 
of the flesh and should have been able to remain constant to His First 
Married 'Love 5 even after Her Departure from this world. 

But the nature as well as the object of the Lord’s Marriage are altogether 
different from those made on this Earth. The Lord’s Marriage is the only 
real marriage. The marriages that take place among the people of this world is 
an unwholesome caricature of the Reality. The proper way of putting the 
question mooted above would, therefore, be not that the Marriage of the Lord 
should conform to the human ideal, but that the human ideal itself may be lived 
down by the realization of the substantive Truth, viz., the Marriage of the Lord, 
of which it happens to be the distorted, unwholesome reflection. With 
the attainment of the Substantive Truth the automatic subsidence of the malady 
of the sensual appetite, the basis of the human institution of marriage, needs 
must be inevitable. 

The Lord’s marriage, which is eternally enacted on the spiritual plane, made its 
appearance apparently under the conditions of limited time and space in order to 
effect the cure of the disease of sexuality to which the perverse soul is found to 
be addicted. Amorous love between male and female, which is cherished as one 
of the rarest privileges of man and as the source of his highest, purest and most 
exquisite happiness available on this Earth, is not really a blessing at all but on 
the contrary may become by its abuse the greatest of all the curses that afflict 
those who choose to be the temporary denizens of this world. But it is by no 
means possible to get rid of the distemper even if we could be convinced that it 
is such a possible evil. The Shastras have recommended marriage in place of 
promiscuous and unrestrained sexual relationship in order to provide a salutary 
check on sexual indulgence in the only practicable form. This is intelligible. But 
it is not perfectly clear while they also direct that the sexual act, which must be 
practiced with restraint, should also be performed for pleasing Vishnu, and not 
for the gratification of the sensuous appetite itself. The Shastras declare that by 
pleasing Vishnu parents as well as their issue will be really benefited by 
obtaining lasting immunity from the clutches of mundane lust. 



But it is very difficult to understand what the Shastras really mean when they 
enjoin the performance of the sexual act of generation to please Vishnu. Are 
we to suppose that the sexual act is pure in itself and as such is a fit offering for 
the Lord? That it is, therefore, our duty to indulge in sexual activity desired by 
God Himself. This does not however, appear to be the proper meaning of 
the Shastric injunctions regarding ‘satvika marriage? The object of the Shastras 
is to discourage sensuality in any form. The sexual act minus sensuality is 
a contradiction in terms. The Shastras do not plainly tell us so, but 
they nevertheless clearly leave it to be inferred that the institution of marriage is 
for the purpose of getting rid of sensuality. 

Why is Vishnu dragged into this sensuous affair at all? But how else also is 
sensuousness to be overcome, if it is desirable to get rid of it? By the Touch 
of the Lord alone the hold of the flesh on our souls slackens automatically. If 
one marries really for pleasing Vishnu, the Lord accepts the offering that is 
sincerely made. The acceptance of the Lord helps the realization of the object of 
the offering. But when such an offering is made, the person making it should do 
so in the right spirit. He is instructed as to the right spirit by the Shastras. If 
his prayer is offered really to please the Lord, or, in other words, for the 
purpose enjoined by the Shastras which tell us how the Lord is pleased, the Lord 
fulfills such prayer by granting its object. The devotee experiences the effect of 
his conduct in the simultaneous increase of his peace of conscience, the 
increasing realization of the spiritual existence centered in the Lotus Feet of 
Vishnu and subsidence of sensuous hankering for the things of this world. It is as 
if fire had burnt up all impurities by its introduction into the scavenger’s heap. 

Strength and health of body are coveted, among other things for the purpose that 
they are necessary for the procreation of strong and healthy children. But is not 
this a begging of the question to be proved? If I have myself no use for strength 
of body and mind except its blind, mechanical exercise my condition will be 
altogether chaotic. Order, specially moral order, is impossible without conscious 
subordination to one supreme purpose. There must be some intelligible object to 
which all our faculties may be unhesitatingly directed. 

That object is the attainment of the Lotus Feet of Vishnu where dwells eternally 
all highest activity, knowledge and bliss. Strength and health of body are by their 
nature perishable. We do not really know why they come to us and why they 
leave us. So we should not be unduly attached to them for their sake. If God 
permits us to possess them for a time we should use them solely for attaining the 



abiding shelter of the Holy Feet of the Lord. 


There is, no doubt, marriage in the Realm of the Absolute. That is the True 
Marriage. That Marriage is eternal. There the Lord is the only Lover 
and Husband and all souls are the recipients of His Perfect Love. This is 
possible only in the Lord and in the spiritual world. If any mortal attempts to 
have many wives or mistresses in this world he is warned by the Shastras against 
the utter folly and wickedness of such conduct. The self-same Shastras declare 
that the Lord is the only Enjoyer of every creature and that Marriage with the 
Lord is the summum bonum of the spiritual condition. There is, of course, no 
room for any mental or physical activity in such relationship. It is the exercise of 
the eternal relationship of the pure souls, in their spiritual non-material state, 
with the All-soul. 

Conditioned souls, who happen to be under the lure of the flesh, cannot think of 
marriage except by reference to mundane sex. But the Shastras enjoin marriage 
as a help in realizing the life eternal by spiritual co-operation between husband 
and wife, for living down the mundane sensual instinct. They instruct us to 
succeed in this by cultivating the effective spiritual desire of pleasing the Lord 
by our every act. As the Lord can be served under all circumstances and in every 
externally mundane act, why should the sexual act be an exception to the rule? It 
should be possible to serve the Lord by the sexual act as by any other form of 
apparent worldly activity. But the sexual act that is performed as service of the 
Lord cannot, for that very reason, belong to this mundane plane. It becomes 
spiritual activity which is absolutely free from all sensuous unwholesomeness. It 
is better than any negative process. 

Sree Chaitanya enacted the Leela of abstaining from all ordained sexual activity 
during the period of His Married Life. On this point Sree Chaitanya 
differs wholly from Sree Krishna who apparently begot numberless children and 
also cultivated unconventional amorous relationships with the milk-maids 
who were not His wedded wives. In Essence, there is of course no 
difference between the Two. On the spiritual plane abstinence and enjoyment are 
alike wholesome and are really un-opposed to one another. The Conduct of 
Sree Chaitanya need not, therefore be regarded as moral or wholesome in 
the worldly sense, or as either more or less pure than That of Sree Krishna or 
than that of His own married followers. On the spiritual plane there is 
no unwholesomeness or objectionable factor. There is only an infinite range of 
the most varied excellences and exquisiteness. The Conduct of Sree Chaitanya 



as Married House-holder is far above the level of that of every other house¬ 
holder as setting, in a way that is capable of being grasped by the conditioned 
soul, the spiritual ideal for his special benefit and safe-guard him from 
radical misconceptions regarding the Nature of the Union of Sree Radhika with 
Sree Krishna, the Only. Perfect and Substantive Marriage. 

Sree Krishna has really only One sweet-heart, viz., Sree Radhika as Sree 
Radhika Herself has no other tie except Her Love for Krishna. The realization of 
Sree Krishna by Sree Radhika is the only Absolute Realization of the Absolute. 
All other realizations are secondary and derivative but true, and are attainable 
only by the Grace of Sree Radhika. The secondary realizations are, however, 
both possible and perfect so long as they happen to subserve the Supreme 
Purpose of Sree Radhika. The devotees of Sree Chaitanya attain this dependent 
perfection of service by following loyally His Teaching as well as Example. 
Dissociated from either, all souls descend automatically into the sphere of 
sensuous imperfection. 

But the Source of all perfect service is Sree Radhika Who is the Counter-whole 
of Sree Krishna. Sree Chaitanya personates the Function of Sree 
Radhika towards Her Eternal Consort, in order to bestow the Loving service of 
Sree Radhika to conditioned souls who have no taste at all for the spiritual 
service of the Lord. He is the Ideal Devotee, devoted to His Lord. Such Devotee 
admits no relationship with anything except the Lord. So long as Sree 
Chaitanya continued to exhibit the Leela of leading the life of a married house¬ 
holder He showed clearly that it is possible to marry in order to serve the Lord 
which is incompatible with the least attachment or love for anybody ,else 
except Godhead. He was a dutiful Son, Brother, Husband, Friend, without 
being attached in the least to Brother, Husband, Friend or Father in the 
worldly sense. Krishna was all along His sole Father, Mother, Brother, wife, 
Friend. The devotees were no doubt loved by Sree Chaitanya; as they served 
Krishna in the same way that He Himself did. He refused to be led by any of His 
devotees and compelled all who desired His Favour to serve only Krishna. This 
Quality of Absolute Independence and Aggressive Superiority of His Service of 
Krishna raises Him above all His associates and followers. But this Superiority 
must not be imitated by any other person. All other persons should serve Sree 
Krishna in obedience to Sree Chaitanya; that is to say by submission to Sree 
Radhika Who is Krishna Himself and Who cannot be disobeyed by His 
devotees. This premier position of Sree Radhika and its rationale has been made 
intelligible to souls under the thralldom of Maya by the Career of Sree 



Chaitanya. The jiva souls should stand to Sree Radhika in the same relation as 
His followers stand to Sree Chaitanya Himself. Sree Krishna is served 
independently by Sree Radhika alone, Who employs an infinite army of Her own 
servants, i.e., either inseparable or separable portions of Her essence in Her 
Service of Krishna. 

Before beginning his account of the Marriage of Sree Gaursundar and 
Vishnupriya Devi, Thakur Brindavandas takes particular care to mention that the 
Supreme Lord, Sree Chaitanya never even listened to the name of a female. This 
precautionary remark is followed up by the observation that Sree Gauranga must 
on no account be prayed to as the Amorous Lover notwithstanding His identity 
with Sree Krishna. This salutary and most important and explicit prohibition has 
been too often deliberately ignored by the Gaur Nagaris by deviating 
deliberately or through ignorance from the path enjoined by Sree Chaitanya 
Himself and His most authentic biographer and associates. This Sect, arguing 
from the fact of identity between Sree Chaitanya and Sree Krishna, persists in 
regarding Sree Chaitanya as taking delight in amorous dalliances with His 
Consorts and Sweethearts at Nabadwip. Under the lead of a corrupt duty these 
misguided people have not even scrupled to invent imaginary stories of Sree 
Chaitanya’s amorous escapades in order to bring His Activities into line with 
Those of Sree Krishna. This is an unpardonable and immoral travesty of 
authentic history and an offense at the Holy Feet of Sree Chaitanya and His 
associates. In fact there cannot be a greater blunder, nor one that is more 
disastrous in its spiritual and moral consequences, than this open attempt to 
ignore that very feature of the Career of Sree Chaitanya which constitutes the 
most characteristic distinction between His Leela and That of Sree Krishna. The 
Activities of Sree Chaitanya are absolutely free from even the appearance of 
mundane sexuality. 

Let us follow in the footsteps of Thakur Brindavandas in describing the Marriage 
of the Lord for a second time, and being armed with this basic principle of His 
Career, try to understand a little more definitely the real significance of the 
Marriage of Sree Gauranga with Sree Vishnupriya Devi as we proceed with the 
narrative itself. 

The Narrative is presented by Thakur Brindavandas in the following manner. 

The Supreme Lord was wholly absorbed with tasting the sweets of learning 
and teaching His students after the Departure of Sree Lakshmi Devi from this 
world. But Sachi Devi had no other thought than that of finding a suitable 



maiden to marry her Son a second time. She at last arrived at a satisfactory 
decision. She had noticed with approbation the conduct of a Young Maiden, 
Vishnupriya, the Daughter of a well-known father, Raj pandit Sanatan Misra. 
Sachi Devi had frequently met this Girl at the bathing ghat of the Ganges. 
Sanatan Misra was a native of Nabadwip. He was of a most merciful disposition. 
He was possessed of a frank and generous nature and the. highest faith in 
Vishnu. His occupation consisted in doing good to others and showing 
hospitality to all chance-guests. He was truthful, self-controlled, born of a high 
family. He was well to do and had a large number of dependents. 

Sree Vishnupriya Devi, Mother of the world, was the Very Self of Lakshmi Devi, 
the Eternal Consort of Sree Narayana. Sachi Devi had conceived a 
great affection for the Maiden at the very first sight and regarded Her as worthy 
of being the Consort of her Son. Vishnupriya was accustomed from infancy 
to bathe in the Ganges twice and even thrice every day and had no other 
interest in Her life save devotion to Her father, mother and Vishnu. She daily met 
Sachi Devi at the bathing ghat of the Ganges and greeted her feet with great 
humility. The mother also blessed Her with the greatest affection, ‘May Krishna 
bestow on You the Favour of a Worthy Husband., During her baths in the 
Ganges Sree Sachi Devi conceived the desire of joining the Girl to her Son in the 
bond of nuptial union. As a matter of fact the very idea had also already occurred 
to the Rajpandit and his family, and Sanatan Misra was no less anxious to 
bestow his Daughter or Sree Gaursundar. 

It so chanced that one day Sachi Devi, having sent for Kasinath Pandit, 
requested him to make the formal proposal of the Marriage of his Daughter with 
her Son to the Rajpandit and also to arrange the same in a definite manner if he 
was agreeable. Kasinath Pandit immediately made his way to the Rajpandit and 
after being received with great respect, submitted his proposal. It was to this 
effect, ‘I have a proposal to make to you. I would ask you by all means to do 
what I am going to propose if you consider it desirable. Give your Daughter to 
Viswambhar Pandit. I consider the connection altogether suitable. He is 
the proper Husband for your Daughter as this Best of maidens is also in every 
way Fit Bride for Him. They suit One Another exactly as Krishna and Rukimni.’ 

On this the Rajpandit held a hurried consultation with the members of his family 
who also pressed upon him the desirability of unhesitating and immediate 
acceptance of the proposal. Thereupon the Rajpandit informed Kasinath Pandit 
that he had no objection to bestow his Daughter on Viswambhar Pandit. If such a 



connection could be settled for his Daughter he would regard it as nothing less 
than the reward of the previous good deeds of himself and his whole family.’ He 
informed Kasinath Pandit to return to Sachi Devi and inform her of his decision. 
He repeated his assurance that he was prepared to carry out his word by all 
means. On hearing this Kasinath Pandit with great satisfaction took his leave and 
laid his information of what had happened before Sachi Devi. The mother was 
delighted on hearing the success of her endeavour and busily set about making 
the necessary preparations for the Marriage of her Son. 

On learning of the approaching Nuptials of the Lord all His disciples felt the 
utmost gladness in their hearts. The great Buddhimanta was the first to offer 
his services in this connection. He said that he would bear all the expenses of 
the Marriage. Mukunda Sanjaya protested as it would completely shut himself 
out. Buddhimanta Khan replied that the Marriage would not be celebrated on 
the paltry scale of the wedding of a Brahmana, but on that of a Prince. 

The adhibas ceremony (preliminary to Wedding) was celebrated with great iclat 
by all friends and followers at the auspicious Moment on the auspicious 
Day. Huge canopies were hung up and the grounds were enclosed by rows 
of plantain trees on all sides. Pitchers filled with water, lighted lamps, paddy- 
grain, milk-curd, twigs of the mango and every other kind of auspicatory articles 
were collected on the spot in huge quantities and the whole ground 
was beautifully painted with the solution of powdered rice (Rlipana). 

All Vaishnavas, Brahmanas and other worthy persons of Nabadwip were invited 
to partake, in the afternoon, the betel-nut of the adhibas ceremony ? 

Musicians duly turned up as soon as it was afternoon and struck up a delightful 
concert; The music was swelled by the sounds of mridanga, sanai, jai-dhak 
kartal and other instruments. The ‘bards’ began to recite the praises of the family 
and loyal matrons uttered glorificatory ejaculations. The Brahmanas raised the 
Vedic chant as the Jewel of the best community of the twice-born made 
His Appearance and assumed His Seat in the center of the assembled people. 

The Brahmanas, who had congregated, thereupon experienced a great joy in 
their minds as they sat in a circle round Sree Gaursundar. 

Then they brought out the perfumes, sandal paste, betel, excellent garlands and 
distributed among the Brahmanas. They ,placed the garland round the 
head, smeared all parts of the body with the sandal-paste and offered a pot-full 
of betels, to every single guest. Nadia was but the community of the 
Brahmanas. There was no end of Brahmanas at Nadia. It was not possible to 



ascertain the number of the Brahmanas as they continued to arrive and depart. 
Among them there were also not a few who were extremely greedy and who, 
after receiving their presents once, returned in a different dress. Presenting 
themselves in the thick of the crowd these greedy Brahmanas carried away 
repeatedly sandal, betel-nut and garlands. All were mad with joy. Who could 
recognize anybody ? The Lord laughingly gave the command to give away 
sandal and garlands three times to every one. By this Command the Lord 
condoned the offense of those who, having taken once, persisted to take the 
articles over and over again. The Lord loves the Brahmanas. He thought in His 
Mind that if a Brahmana was caught in the act of taking more than once he ran 
the risk of being chide by some careless ,person. It is however, an offense to take 
anything by cunning in matters spiritual. The Lord, therefore, provided against 
all these contingencies by ordering all the articles to be given away three times 
to every one. All Persons were highly delighted by obtaining them in a triple 
measure and no one again took anything by cunning. Garlands, sandal, betel-nut 
and betel that were given away in this manner exceeded all limits. The secret 
how this was possible no one knew. Let alone what men actually received, that 
portion of it, which was dropped on the ground in the act of giving away, would 
have sufficed for five ordinary marriages, if the quantity could be available in 
the house-hold of any other person. All persons were exceedingly gladdened 
in their hearts. All said, All praise to this adhibas ! We have seen millionaires 
in this Nabadwip. No one’s ancestor ever performed such a grand 
adhibas ceremony. No one gave away so ungrudgingly such excellent sandal, 
garlands, betel-nut and betel. 

Presently the Rajpandit arrived with a glad heart and with all the requisites for 
the adhibas ceremony. He was accompanied by Brahmanas, relations and a 
great company of merry musicians, singers and dancers. The Rajpandit joyfully 
put the tilaka mark on the Forehead of the Lord in accordance with the 
method enjoined by the Vedas. This joyful Event was acclaimed by a great 
chorus of the chant of Hari and the singing of hymns of praise. All loyal matrons 
also acclaimed the Glorious Event. The greatest rejoicings manifested 
themselves in the form of music and song. Having in this manner performed the 
adhibas ceremony the prince of Brahmanas, Sanatan, returned home. The 
kinsfolk of the Lord also went forth and performed the adhibas ceremony of 
Lakshmi at the Latter’s Home in the same way. Both sides also performed with 
the greatest zeal every other customary rite. 



Chapter 16 Marriage with Sree Vishnupriya Devi (Contd.) 


On the auspicious Morn following the adhibas ceremony the Lord bathed in the 
Ganges and performed the worship of Vishnu. Thereafter in the company of all 
relations and friends He applied Himself to the due performance of nandimukh 
and other rites. 

There was a great uproar of music, dance and song. Auspicatory shouts of praise 
were raised on all sides. Innumerable pots filled with water, paddy-grain, milk- 
curd, lighted lamps, twigs of the mango, were placed at the doorways, inside the 
rooms and all about the yard. On all sides flags of diverse colours gaily waved in 
the breeze. Plantain-trees, to which branches of the mango were tied, were 
planted in every direction. 

Then the mother was busily occupied in the company of all the matrons with the 
due performance of all customary rites. Having first of all worshipped 
the Ganges the joyful party proceeded to the site of the goddess Shasthi to 
the sound of music. Having worshipped Shasthi the mother and her 
entourage visited the homes of all friends and went through the customary 
performance at each household. The party returned home after having 
accomplished these protracted functions. Sachi Devi made all the ladies heavy 
presents of fried rice, plantain, oil, betel and vermilion. By the Will of the Lord 
the articles exceeded all measure and Sachi Devi gave away to every one in five 
and sevenfold measure. All the ladies literally swam in oil. There was none 
whose heart’s desire was not completely fulfilled. There were similar high 
rejoicings in Lakshmi’s home under the conduct of Lakshmi’s mother. In a fit of 
ecstatic delight the Rajpandit flung away all his resources in these festivities. 

After the due performance of all these ceremonies Sree Gaursundar had a respite 
which He utilized in making presents of eatables and clothing to all 
the Brahmanas, evincing, in the method, the greatest humility. He accorded 
the fullest respect to all of them in due proportion of the worth of each. 

The Brahmanas then returned to their homes for their meals after blessing the 
Lord with the greatest affection. 

As the day wore into afternoon all the people applied themselves to the pleasant 
function of robing the Lord. This was an elaborate process. The Whole Body of 
the Lord was anointed with sandal-paste and other perfumes with well-designed 



interspaces. On the Forehead of the Lord a crescent was painted with sandal 
inside which was put the charming tilaka mark made of perfume. A wonderful 
Crown adorned His Beautiful Head. His Whole Frame was covered with 
garlands. Excellent cloth of the finest grain was worn in the triple girdled style 
(trikachha). His Beautiful Eyes were painted with collyrium. Paddy-grain, durha 
grass and cotton thread were tied to His Wrist. Tender shoots of the plantain with 
the mirror were placed in His Hand. A pair of golden pendants hung down from 
His Ears. The upper parts of His Arms were bound with dazzling chains of 
various precious jewels. Whatever decoration was likely to set forth the Beauty 
of each Limb was put in the ,proper part by all the people with the greatest 
delight. All persons of both sexes were fascinated by the Sight of the 
Appearance of the Lord attired as Bridegroom and in their joy had no thoughts 
on their own account. 

When the last quarter of the day still lingered all people gave their opinion that it 
was time to make the auspicious start so that the Lord might arrive at the house 
of the Bride in the hour of twilight, after perambulating the whole of Nabadwip 
for the space of one full prahara. 

And now Buddhimanta Khan joyfully brought up an excellent litter (dola) which 
he had specially made for the occasion. There arose a great tumult of song and 
music. The Brahmanas recited the auspicatory texts of the Veda. The bards 
began to recite eulogies. Joy assumed a visible form on all sides. 

Then, after passing His mother on the right and having bowed with great respect 
to the Brahmanas, as Sree Gauranga seated Himself on the dola, there arose all 
around Him the triumphal shouts of benedictions. The ladies uttered jais. There 
could be heard nothing but auspicious sounds in every direction. 

The Lord first of all proceeded to the side of the Ganges. There He saw the 
halfmoon just overhead. Thousands of lights now began to burn. There was a 
great variety of fire-works. The soldiers of Buddhimanta Khan marched in front 
and were followed by his other employees in double file. Behind them marched 
the bearers of flags of different colours. Pantomimes and clowns in various 
guises followed. Dancers in innumerable groups danced along with the utmost 
gaiety. Jai-dhak, beer-dak, mridanga, kahal, pataha, dagarh, conch, flute of 
reed, karatal, baranga, horn, instruments with five different melodies, in 
countless number, made up the vast concert. The Lord laughed as He noted 
with pleasure millions of children dancing along with great merriment in the 



midst of the musicians. On beholding that great rejoicing not children only but 
all the wise men joined the procession dancing by discarding all shame. 


Having arrived on the bank of the Ganges the party of the Bridegroom halted 
and performed, for a short while, dance, song and hilarious music. This 
was succeeded by incessant raining of flowers. After making obeisance to 
the Ganges the party traversed merrily the whole of Nabadwip. On beholding 
the equipages of the Marriage that are far above anything mortal, all 
people experienced a great ecstasy in their minds. The people said, ‘We have 
seen many big marriages. Never did we see such grandeur’. Men and women 
of fortunate Nadia in this manner floated on the tide of happiness on 
beholding the Lord. 

All were happy save only those Brahmanas who had beautiful unmarried 
daughters in their homes. Those Brahmanas gave vent to their sorrows. ‘I 
could not bestow my daughter on such a Groom ! I have no luck; whence could 
it be otherwise?’ Thakur Brindavandas describing the Marriage Festivities of 
the Lord, in the words quoted above, makes his obeisance to the feet of 
the residents of Nabadwip who possess the power of beholding beatific Sights 
like these. 

Thus did the Lord merrily journey from one quarter of the town to another of the 
whole of Nabadwip. He then came to the residence of Raj pandit just in the hour 
of twilight and was received by multitudinous acclamations which mingled with 
the tumult raised by the musicians of the parties of Bride and Bridegroom vying 
with each another. Rajpandit, advancing with great respect, took the Lord in his 
arms from the dola and conveyed Him to His Seat. The Pandit scattered flowers 
with his own hands, being perfectly oblivious of his own body by joy on 
beholding his Son-in-law. 

Then having brought out all the requisites of the ceremonial election of 
Bridegroom the Brahmana seated himself to accept the Lord formally as his Son- 
in-law. He duly performed this ceremony of election by the offering of water for 
washing the Feet, the requisites of worship, water to rinse the Mouth, clothing 
and ornaments. Then his spouse appeared with the other ladies and! began to 
perform the auspicatory rites according to the approved form. The ladies placed 
grains of paddy and blades of the durha grass on the Beautiful Head of the Lord 
and waved a lighted lamp, of seven wicks fed by clarified butter, in front of the 
Lord. They continued to ejaculate the glorificatory note as they cast at Him fried 



rice and shell. Thus did they perform the customary rites. 


And now, having decked Her in all Her ornaments, they brought out Sree 
Lakshmi Devi, conveying Her on a seat. On this the friends of the Lord 
merrily lifted Him up by His seat. Then, according to the custom, having put up 
an inner screen round the Lord, the Bride was made to perambulate the 
Lord seven times by keeping Him on Her right. After perambulating the Lord 
seven times Lakshmi Devi placed Herself in front of Him in the attitude of 
obeisance. 

Then there was a great throwing of flowers; and the instruments of both parties 
put up a great music. On all sides male and female continued to employ 
their voices in acclamation. Joy's own self came down from on high in his 
visible form. 

Sree Lakshmi Devi, Mother of the world, made the surrender of Herself by 
placing the garland of flowers at the Feet of the Lord. Gaursundar, with a 
slight Smile, took up the garland and placed it round the Neck of Lakshmi. 

Then Lakshmi and Narayana began to throw flowers at Each Other with 
great alacrity. Brahma and other gods, remaining invisible, merrily sent showers 
of flowers. The partisans of Lakshmi and the Lord now got up a violent 
quarrel, on behalf of the Bride and Groom, with minds delirious with joy. The 
followers of Lakshmi and those of the Lord seemed to prevail alternately as the 
people continued with peals of laughter to inform the Lord. A slight Smile 
played on the Beautiful Face of the Lord. On beholding this all people swam in 
the current of transcendental bliss. 

Thousands of great torches burnt brightly. Nothing could be heard on account of 
the tumultuous music. The music and acclamations of the charming rite of 
‘ Catching the First Glimpse of Each Other's Moon-like Faces’ pervaded all 
worlds, so great was that mighty uproar. Having thus gaily performed the 
ceremony of Srimukchandrika Sree Gaursundar took His Seat in the company of 
Sree Lakshmi. 

Thereafter Rajpandit also assumed a seat, with his mind overflowing with 
delight, for the purpose of making the offering of his Daughter. Having 
duly offered water for washing the Feet, the requisites for worship, water 
for cleansing the Mouth he uttered the formula of his decision to offer his 



Daughter. The pious father of Sree Lakshmi Devi, desiring only the Pleasure of 
Vishnu, made over his Daughter into the Hands of the Lord. He then 
gave expression to his pent-up joy by giving away as dowry goodly cows, land, 
beds, male and female slaves, in great abundance. He then caused Sree Lakshmi 
Devi to be seated on the Left Side of the Lord and began to perform the 
ceremony of offering libation to fire. After performing all the Scriptural and 
customary rites he conducted the Bridegroom and Bride to the inner apartments. 
Vaikuntha manifested itself in the house of Raj pandit. At last the Couple sat 
down to meal. Lakshmi and Krishna remained joyously together during that 
night unto supreme benediction. 

Who can express in words the joy that possessed Sanatan Pandit and his whole 
family? Sanatan and his family now realized the same high fortune as fell 
of yore to the lot of Nagnajit, Janaka, Vishmaka, Jambubanta, as the fulfillment 
of his previous devoted service of Vishnu. 

At break of day, the Essence of all the worlds performed the remaining social 
rites. In the afternoon, as the hour of returning home drew near, there began 
a great display of music, song and dance. Loud acclamations rent every 
direction. The ladies shouted jais. The Brahmanas recited blessings and read 
sloka s from the Veda in keeping with the occasion of starting. Dhak, pataha, 
sanai, baranga, karatal, played vociferously, vying with one another. 

The Lord, having bowed to the superiors, ascended the dola in the company of 
Lakshmi. All the people raised the triumphant shout of the Name of Hari as they 
formed in procession and led away the Jewel of the race of the twice-born. 

All those persons, who beheld Them as They proceeded on Their way, praised 
Them most admiringly and in many diverse ways. The ladies obtaining a 
Sight of the Pair said, This Girl is most fortunate. She must have served Kamala 
and Parbati during Her many lives? Some of them said, They seem to be Hara 
and Gauri themselves? Another lady declared, ‘Methinks they are Kamala and 
Sree Hari? There were those who expressed the view that the Couple were 
certainly Rati and Kamadeva. To the minds of others They seemed like Indra and 
Sachi. Some held that They most resembled Ramachandra and Seeta. Thus said 
all 

those ladies of excellent deeds. Thakur Brindavandas expressed once more his 
appreciation of the high fortune of the male and female inhabitants of Nabadwip 



who had power to witness these glories of the Lord. All people over the whole of 
Nadia overflowed with happiness by the Auspicious Glance of Lakshmi and 
Narayana. 

The Marriage Procession moved along with the greatest merriment, with dance, 
song and music, amid a continuous shower of flowers. Then in an Auspicious 
Moment ushered by every blessing Lakshmi and Narayana merrily arrived at 
Their Home. The mother attended by the loyal matrons most gladly welcomed 
the Daughter-in-law into the House. As Lakshmi and Narayana entered Their 
Apartments and assumed Their Seats a mighty acclamation of Praise filled the 
whole universe. 

Thakur Brindavandas, with due sense of the nature of the occasion, writes that 
the joy that manifested itself is beyond all expression and that no one 
can describe that Glory. If the eye but once beholds the Glow of the Person of 
the Lord that fortunate person is cleansed of all his sins and repairs to the Realm 
of Vaikuntha. All those people had a direct vision of the Marriage of the Lord. 

The Lord rightly bears the Appellations of 'Merciful 5 and 'Lord of the humble . 5 

Then the Lord satisfied all the dancers, bards and beggars, by the gift of 
clothing, money and kind words. The Lord with His Own Hands merrily 
gave away clothing to all the Brahmanas, relatives, friends and to everyone 
severally. The Lord bestowed His Embrace on Buddhimanta Khan whose joy no 
words can describe. These Leelas have never any interval. The Veda says of 
Their Appearance and Disappearance. Who can even in a hundred years describe 
all the Leelas that took place within the space of a single danda? ‘Accepting on 
my head , 5 says Thakur Brindavandas, ‘the Command of Nityananda Swarup, I 
write the mere summary in pursuance of His mercy . 5 He concludes the account 
of the Divine Marriage with the remark that whoever reads or listens to these 
Leelas of the supreme Lord, verily enjoys communion with Gauranga Himself. 

We have attempted to give above the account of the Marriage of Sree 
Gaursundar and Sree Vishnupriya Devi in the words of Thakur 
Brindavandas himself in order that the reader may have, as far as possible, the 
actual words of the highest authority, the Vyasa, of the Leela of Sree Chaitanya. 

It will be our subordinate duty to try to understand this severely compressed 
account in the light of the commentators. An attempt on this line has already 
been made in a previous chapter in discussing the Marriage of the Lord with 



Sree Lakshmi Devi. We shall confine ourselves here to the task of adding a few 
remarks to what have already been presented to the reader on the same subject at 
that place. 

The Lord makes His Appearance in this world with His Paraphernalia. When the 
Lord chooses to manifest the Leela of the Devotee He is attended by all 
His Consorts Each in Her corresponding appropriate role. Sree Chaitanya has 
Two Consorts, appearing successively One at a time. Sree Lakshmi Devi is 
that Aspect of the Divine Power Who is termed ‘Sree’ or ‘Beauty’ by the 
Scriptures. She represents Spiritual Law, Who is eternally in attendance on Her 
Lord. Even when the Lord chooses to appear in this world He is served by the 
Higher Law of the Spiritual Realm. This does not require to be masked as it is 
not liable to be misunderstood even by bound souls. But as the Divine 
Manifestation grows towards maturity the Regulated Service recedes to the 
background making way for Spontaneous Devotion. This also has to make room 
for the Highest Form, viz., Service in apparent separation. 

It is not the purpose at this stage to enter fully into the subject of the Nature of 
the Divine Power, and Her various Faces. In Krishna Leela there is no use of any 
restraint by the Divinity in His Pastimes. The Realm and Consorts of Godhead 
appear in that Leela as They are in Chaitanya Leela They appear in Their 
mellower form of Relationship of love for the bound soul. The bound soul is not 
banished from the Pastimes of Krishna because Krishna makes no difference 
between one soul and another and is always prepared to deal with a person in 
accordance with the latter’s disposition and according as service is rendered or 
refused. Sree Chaitanya Leela exhibits the indiscriminate Mercy of the Lord to 
bound souls. This means that Krishna Leela in the Positive Aspect is not 
altogether closed to the bound soul. The latter may even serve Krishna by His 
Grace even in this world by the process of service of the highest order. 

The point that is to be specially noticed in this connection is the fact that the 
bound soul may serve the Lord in exactly the same way as the soul in the state of 
Grace. The Lord with all His Consorts, Associates, Realm and Paraphernalia is 
always at the door of the bound soul and ever Willing to offer Him His very 
Highest Service that is rendered to the Lord in the Divine Realm proper. 

The very statement of the above proposition suggests a number of most 
reasonable objections. If the Lord is with the bound soul as much as He is 
with His eternal devotees why cannot the former always have the sight of Him 



and His? The reply is that this is so in order to add a special charm to his 
service and one that is coveted by even the purest souls but which is not 
available to all of them although it is unsolicitously open to every bound soul. 
The very condition, viz., the bound state, helps the most charming realization of 
the eternal function. The bound soul cannot see Krishna and His eternal 
devotees as They really are. But the bound soul is privileged to realize that 
Krishna and His eternal devotees are identical with Sree Chaitanya and His 
associates whom he can see and serve with his available faculties if he is only 
willing to do so. 

But the bound soul can also see Lakshmi Devi and Vishnupriya Devi, Mother 
Sachi and Sree Jaggannath Misra, in Their real eternal Forms. This is so because 
unless they see at least the pure soul as he really is, they cannot understand the 
relationship of separation from the Lord to which they are doomed by the bound 
state. This vision is dependent on the fulfillment of the condition of willing 
acceptance of its real import. But this inclination is rarely, coveted for the very 
reason that the wish is realized without any difficulty. This is so unbelievable ! 

If one reads this account without complete acceptance of and faith in its 
conclusions he will necessarily fail to realize its truth. Hypothetical or 
tentative acquiescence in certain assumptions, for the purpose of enjoying the 
charms of an artistic conception based on those assumptions, is not sufficient for 
a reader of the Chaitanya Bhagavat if one is really anxious to follow the method 
of selfdiscipline laid down in the work as the indispensable condition for the 
proper realization of the substantive Truth. This faith in the only cognisable 
Forms of the Reality is not natural to the bound state and is apparently opposed 
to the same. At this point the help and guidance of sadhus or self-realized 
souls become an absolute necessity. 

The bound soul is ever tending to fly away after the illusive appearances of the 
Deluding Energy. He is convinced that he will find in such pursuit, in the 
long run, what his perverted nature most ardently desires, viz., boundless 
sensuous enjoyment for himself. It is, therefore, almost impossible to expect him 
to destroy these seemingly sole objects of his heart’s desire by his own hands. 

This is the task that the sadhu has got to perform for him for the benefit of the 
bound soul. The sadhu is seconded in his efforts by the spiritual Scriptures but is 
opposed by everything else in this world. This is not inexplicable. The 
erring soul has to choose between the persuasions of the spiritual 



Scriptures supporting the sadhu and the dissuasions of the whole phenomenal 
world, on the very threshold of the spiritual life. 

The decisive part is, therefore, played by one’s own judgment. It is necessary to 
exercise one’s judgment with a due sense of the far-reaching consequences 
to oneself that are involved. The Scriptures as well as the sadhus can 
only persuade but can never compel the bound soul to accept the course of 
selfdiscipline that is absolutely necessary for self-realization. 

Sree Lakshmi Devi and Sree Vishnupriya Devi are the Eternal Consorts of the 
Supreme Lord and possess the special capacity of appearing with the Lord 
for the purpose of being visible in There actual Lorms to the bound souls, in 
order to effect their deliverance. When it is further explained that Sree Lakshmi 
Devi is described in the Scriptures as the Power Who is identical with ‘Beauty’ 
or ‘Law’ the reader, who is not sufficiently mindful of the conditions to be 
fulfilled for the purpose of realizing the proper nature of the Consorts of 
Godhead, may be disposed to suspect that the Truth is being attempted to be 
figuratively set forth by a number of cleverly devised allegorical forms and that 
it should be sufficient to bear in mind in the abstract the principles involved 
without taking the concrete side into serious consideration. The less skeptical 
may fall into the opposite inconsistency of attempting to take everything in its 
literal worldly sense. Both may unconsciously ignore the function of the sadhus 
being absolutely necessary for obtaining access to the Reality. 

There are, of course, those who may maintain that if the Reality cannot be 
realized without submitting to a sadhu as the condition of enlightenment 
how can one be sure that the sadhu and his Scriptures may not also mislead? 
They may also quote actual instances of persons who have gone astray, by 
admission of the sadhus .themselves, after a course of training with them. The 
validity of the objection consists in the fact that the initiative in the form of 
choice of course ever lies, and must ever lie, with the individual soul. The sadhu, 
if he is not properly served, will remain absolutely unknown to the disciple after 
the longest period of apparently strenuous and faithful service. The Truth will 
not submit to the dominating efforts of any individual soul, neither does He 
accept the compelled service, ( ?) of anyone. The pure soul accepts the 
whole responsibility of this position and is accordingly enabled to see the light 
by which to walk loyally. 


The polemic and disbelieving trifler with Truth alone is ever effectively shut out 



from the Realm of the Absolute. The bound soul is accustomed to 
submit tentatively to hypothetical courses of instruction and training 
under hypothetical teachers of apparent truths. He is also insensibly but 
stubbornly disposed to carry the same procedure into the Realm of the Absolute. 
It is the function of the sadhu, of his own accord, to warn all erring souls against 
these confirmed errors of habit. It is for the individual soul himself to accept or 
reject the advice. Those, who have undue faith in the tentative method, resent 
the advice which they are naturally disposed to regard as uncalled-for 
and mischievous. The tendencies never fully eradicated till one stands face to 
face with the Realty. This is the cause of the risk and uncertainty that have to 
be faced by the novice, but they are quite inevitable and perfectly in 
accordance with the Absolute position itself. 

So Sree Lakshmi Devi and Sree Vishnupriya Devi need neither be believed nor 
disbelieved as Consorts of the Divinity by any one prior to understanding 
the nature of the relationship in which one is required by the conditions of 
the case to place himself in order to be enabled to grasp the issue of the 
advocates of realizable Absolute Truth. The issue need not be confounded with 
any hollow hypotheses of erring mortals. Nor need it be conceded by 
one’s condescending oral assent to possess the transcendental nature which 
is neither comprehensible by the intellect of the bound soul nor compatible 
in practice with any of his worldly interests. For such persons the proper 
attitude should be to try to understand the preliminary conditions with the help 
of the Narrative and abstain from all ‘opinions’ on the Nature of the Divine 
Power Herself till the she has had time to explain what he requires to know 
further. 

These remarks hold also in the case of the Third Plenary Power that ever 
accompanies the Supreme Lord Sree Krishna Chaitanya whenever He chooses to 
appear in this world. She bears the name of ‘Neela' in the Shastras and is 
no other than the Abode of Godhead, (Sridhama). The ‘Place’ where the 
Lord appears in this world is His own Plenary Power, or Eternal Consort. 

This would dispose of the gross and profane speculations of the sensualist 
schools regarding the subject of Divine Amour, the relationship that subsists 
between the Lord and His Plenary Powers Sree Bhu and Neela Who bear the 
names of Lakshmi, Vishnupriya and Nabadwipdhama in the transcendental 
vocabulary of the Scriptures Whose Natures are realizable only by the devotees 
of Lord Chaitanya. 



All this at the first sight cannot but appear to be ‘bizarre’ and unsettling, to all 
persons contentedly moving on the plane of three dimensions. Such persons may 
even affect to regard the statements as the ‘products’ of a diseased imagination 
and their own ‘fool’s paradise’ as the undoubted abode of sanity and wisdom. 

But such a view does not remove every difficulty from the path even of those 
who choose deliberately to shut their ears to the pleadings of the rational instinct. 
The so-called mundane ‘positivists’ want a real standing-ground for their 
perverted speculations. Those wise persons cherish the wild faith that by putting 
the cart before the horse greater results are to be gained than by the ordinary 
method of obeying the voice of humdrum reason and bitter experience. 

The names ‘LakshmV, ‘Vishnupriya\ ‘Nabadwip’ are not words denoting 
anything limited or worldly. Neither are they mere symbols or conceptions 
of any worldly entity. They are the Divine Consorts Themselves. 

The Transcendental Nomenclature is inconceivable except by Their Grace 
identical with the Mercy of Godhead Himself Who ever acts through His Plenary 
Powers in His Dealings with jivas who are dissociated emanations of the Pure 
Essence of His Marginal Potency. 

As a matter of fact the Activities of the Lord, even when He chooses to Appear 
in this world, remain absolutely unintelligible to the conditioned soul as long as 
the latter persists in the attitude of refusal to seek the help of the 
Plenary Spiritual Power of Godhead for realizing the same. For understanding 
the Leela of Sree Gauranga it is necessary to approach the subject by willing, 
convinced and active submission to real Sadhus who are the eternal servants of 
Sridhama Nabadwip, the Eternal Realm of the Divinity, Who alone can confer 
the service of Lakshmi Devi and Vishnupriya Devi Who serve Sree Gaursundar 
with Amorous Devotion of the most distinctive delicious types that 
are comprehensible to conditioned souls only by Their Grace. This 
comprehension is the only proper goal of all individual souls gone astray and is 
identical with the service of Sree Sree Radha-Govinda attainable in the 
unalloyed spiritual state. 

For these reasons we abstain from dealing with this subject more specifically at 
this place. The Doings of the Lord as Householder can be understood only in the 
light of the practice and teachings of the Lord as a Sannyasin after His apparent 
Renunciation of the world. The object of sitting at the Feet of Sree Krishna 
Chaitanya, the Practicing Ascetic Teacher of the Absolute Truth, is to be enabled 



to understand, through the practice of service taught by Himself by Example and 
Precept, the Absolute Truth as He is realizable by souls who appear to His loyal 
disciple in the Form of Sree Gaursundar dwelling eternally in Sridham 
Nabadwip served with Amorous Devotion by His Consorts Sree 

Lakshmi Devi and Sree Vishnupriya Devi by the method of loving separation. 
Such realization can alone enable a conditioned soul to attain the highest service 
of the Divine Pair Sree Sree Radha-Govinda on the termination of his wrong 
connection with the mundane plane. 



Chapter 17 Triumphs of Learning 


The Lord taught His pupils in all places. His usual resort for the purpose in the 
evening was the side of the Ganges. On His arrival there He took His Seat, as at 
the Academy, in the midst of His pupils. The Performances of the Lord as 
Teacher on the bank of the holy stream remained indelibly impressed on the 
memory of all beholders. Sree Brindavandas Thakur searched all the Scriptures 
to find an analogy by an event of the triple universe. He rejected the following 
suggestions after due consideration of their claims. The analogy of the Moon 
surrounded by the stars of Heaven was rejected on the ground that the Moon is 
spotted-and. subject to the processes of waxing and waning whereas the Nature 
of the Spotless Subject of comparison is Eternally Tull’. Brhaspati, teacher of 
the gods, does not furnish a proper analogy in as much as he happens to be a 
partisan of the devas, whereas our Lord is the Partisan and Help of all sides. 
Cupid god of worldly amour, does not offer the requisites of a proper analog. 

The mind in which he makes his appearance is distracted, whereas on the 
Appearance of the Lord in one’s mind all other bonds are snapped and the mind 
attains the state of supreme purity and satisfaction. In the same way all other 
analogies also appeared to be seriously defective. There could be found only one 
exception. There is real analogy with the Pastimes of the Son of Sree Nanda, 
surrounded by the cowherds, on the banks of the Kalindi (Yamuna). It seemed to 
all people as if the Selfsame Krishna Chandra, in the company of those very 
cowherds, having put on the Lorm of the twice-born, now re-enacted His 
Identical Pastimes on the bank of the Ganges. 

All those, who were privileged to have the Sight of the Lord discoursing to His 
pupils on the bank of the Ganges, experienced a gladness that baffles 
all description. They were no less impressed by the display of His Power, 
and everybody secretly opened his mind to others on this subject. Some said, 
‘Such Power does not belong to man’. Some declared that the Brahmana was 
the Integral Portion of Krishna Himself. Others said that ‘He seemed to be 
the Person of the prophecy that a Brahmana will be King in Gau_a, and held 
that his conclusion was confirmed by the fact that He had all the Bodily Signs 
that prognosticate the King of Kings. Every one made these remarks regarding 
the Lord in accordance with one’s own particular bent of mind. 

The Lord expounded the Scriptures on the bank of the Ganges, adversely 
criticizing the teachers. He exposed the falsity of their interpretations 



by establishing their contradictories and, after refuting all different opinions, 
reestablished them all. He challenged every one to disputation with Himself 
and promised to recognize as a real scholar every one who would fairly meet 
Him only once. He denied that any one possessed the power of holding his 
ground in controversy against Him even by accepting the very interpretations 
that He offered. Thus did the Lord make His Boast and His Bragging Words 
destroyed all vanities of every one who listened to them. 

There was no end of the pupils of the Lord. They formed themselves into 
innumerable groups and pursued their studies at many different places in 
the town. Every day ten or twenty Brahmana boys prostrated themselves at 
the Feet of the Lord and begged to be allowed to study under Him. They prayed 
for His mercy that they might have the good fortune of being enlightened by 
Him to the least extent. The Lord laughed at their words observing that what 
they said was most excellent. The number of the Lord’s pupils went on 
increasing apace every day in this manner. 

Thus the Lord held His learned sessions surrounded by His countless pupils by 
the side of the Ganges. It was a most edifying Sight that was witnessed by 
His fortunate contemporaries. 

The whole of Nabadwip was rendered free from all cause of sorrow by the Holy 
Influence of the Supreme Lord and all those, who were privileged to witness the 
learned Performances of the Lord, were regarded in subsequent years as persons 
of rare good fortune the very sight of whom had power to free one from the 
bondage of the world. Sree Brindavandas Thakur laments his misfortune for not 
having been born at that time, and cherishes the hope that he might retain his 
recollection of those Activities of the Lord at every birth and be born as 
His servant wherever Sree Chaitanya and Nityananda manifest Their 
Divine Activities. 

The above, from the pen of His first biographer, who had his information from 
Nityananda Himself, un-contradicted by any other writers of that or 
subsequent period, proves conclusively, apart from the evidence of His 
associates and followers regarding the Substantive Teaching of the Lord, that 
Sree Chaitanya enjoyed an extraordinary reputation as Disputant and Exponent 
of the Shastras among His contemporaries. Those contemporaries were specially 
given to the cultivation of the Science of Polemics which had been perfected at 
Nabadwip to a point never rivaled anywhere else either then or since. Lest this 



fact fail to be sufficiently grasped by posterity Thakur Brindavandas repeats it 
over and over again and in a most definite manner. As for instance he gives 
prominence to the fact that the Lord was never chary of denouncing the 
interpretations of other Professors, although Nabadwip was at the time full of a 
countless host of the most eminent teachers, proverbially jealous of their 
scholastic reputation to whose ears the denunciations of the Lord were sure to be 
carried in no time. 

But no Professor in all the different branches of learning, which were cultivated 
with equal zeal at Nabadwip, ever dared to meet the Lord in open controversy on 
any issue. Every one was terribly afraid of Him, showed the greatest deference 
to His Views and avoided any direct disputation with Him. And if the Lord was 
pleased to speak kindly to any one that fortunate person became at once His 
most devoted servant. All the people were fully aware of His Extraordinary 
Cleverness even from Infancy and all dreaded and obeyed Him. They also knew 
that no one had really the power to excel or teach Him anything new. Yet no one 
suspected that He was any other than an ordinary mortal. 

The language of Thakur Brindavandas, coming from one who, although an 
admirer of the Lord and using the poetic diction, and after making 
every allowance for so-called oriental hyperbole that is supposed by 
unimaginative empiric thinkers of this country and elsewhere to specially 
characterize all religious literature, makes it plain that Sree Chaitanya was not a 
particularly submissive kind of a person, nor did He seek to serve Godhead in 
the current manner, but was certainly not an opponent of rational, or even 
empiric inquiry on any subject. He was also at the same time a scoffer of all self- 
sufficient superficial pedantry. These qualities were misunderstood by the 
orthodox Vaishnavas also, among whom were persons distinguished for their 
secular learning as well as piety. This Incomprehensible Nature of the Young 
Professor, Who scorned everybody and submitted to none, marked Him out as a 
most extraordinary Person and extorted the unwilling admiration of friends and 
foes alike. That it was not willing admiration in all cases we shall know from 
the sequel. His uncompromising attitude and hostile talk gave deep offense to 
the learned pedants, who only waited for the opportunity of indulging their 
furious animosity against the dreaded Scholar Whom they could not meet in 
honest controversy. 


The attitude of the learned circles of Nadia demonstrates the radical defect of 
empirical intellectualism which does not at all realize the gravity of 



the misfortune of its divorce from the Absolute Truth. Its abstract 
idealistic speculations are a sorry refuge from the dangers of the grosser forms 
of materialistic positivism. This material world is not an illusion. The idealist, 
who affects to look down upon it, is bound to be brought to grief in no time by 
the actual force of the very circumstances that he pretends to contemn. 

The scientific instinct revolts from the sterile and fictitious triumphs of the 
mere idealist. It seeks to satisfy the need of our nature for the substantive Truth 
by creating opportunities of expanded materialistic activities in defiance of 
barren idealism. Sree Gaursundar, however, did not meet the idealists with the 
weapon of grosser materialism. He was content to point out the glaring defects 
of their synthesis with the help of empiric logic itself, as they could not fail 
to understand such argument. By the very nature of the case it is possible 
by means of empiric logic to demolish its own false constructions and 
to demonstrate the necessity of a change of method of investigation for 
the attainment of the Real Truth. 

The difficulty begins after this critical juncture has been reached. Even those, 
who are prepared to admit their defect in controversy, do not always realize 
the necessity of accepting the conclusions of their victorious enemy. The out 
and out sincerity of judgment, that would lead to such acceptance, is very rare 
and implies to an attitude of causeless devotion to the Truth for His Own sake. 
The pedants of Nabadwip did not care to learn the Truth from Sree 
Chaitanyadeva. Neither is this an absolute and immediate drawback for 
progressing in empiric knowledge. A person can improve his empiric knowledge 
by self-application unassisted by any other person by the study of books. Sree 
Gaursundar led His campaign against the futility of this method for attainment of 
the knowledge of the Absolute. Such knowledge, He contended, can only be 
obtained by submitting to receive it from person who is in possession of it. 

The necessity of personal mediation of the teacher for attainment, of the 
Knowledge of the Absolute introduces a condition which it is not possible 
to establish fully by the method of empiric logic. The necessity of the 
acceptance of the principle of personal subordination is also consistently enough 
denied by the empiricists in respect of their own achievement. Their 
misunderstanding is due to the fact that they cannot realize the identity of the 
Teacher of the Absolute with the Message itself. They want to accept the 
Message by leaving out the Bearer of the Same. They have evidently less respect 
and necessity for the servant than for the Master. Their own logic should be able 
to tell them that the Absolute must by His nature be unattainable by any form of 



conditional submission. The mundane egoistic reservation is to be completely 
discarded if one is to approach the Presence of Sree Krishna. The Bhattacharyas 
and Misras of Nabadwip, proud of their learning and fallacious self-sufficiency 
failed to understand the necessity and duty of absolute submission to the real 
teacher of the Word of God. 

They preferred to continue on the path of admitted ignorance and sinfulness. 
This course appeared to them to be less intolerable than absolute submission 
to the servant of Krishna. Such persons are by temperament doomed to 
eternal perdition and the only method that was applicable to their case was that 
of merciless castigation in the form of elaborate exposure of their sophistries, 
by which method alone they might be prevented from misleading less 
wicked foolish people from the path of the pure service of the Lord. The fact, 
that the Bhattacharyas and Misras were not redeemed by Sree Gaursundar, has 
been used, by dishonest pedants who are not on principle prepared to inquire 
with an unbiased mind into the nature of the issue itself that divided the two 
parties, as a circumstance that proves the unconvincing nature of the position 
taken up by Sree Gaursundar. There cannot well be a grosser form of impiety 
under the garb of piety than the unholy assertion that the suffrage of the ignorant 
people of this sinful world establishes the claim of the Absolute to our 
unconditional allegiance to His Holy Feet. Such perversity of judgment is the 
punishment that justly overtakes all insincere natures who, while professing to 
seek the Truth, are willfully bent upon amassing the means for the gratification 
of their own ignorant vanity. To those abnormal people the uncompromising 
attitude of Sree Gaursundar’s advocacy of the Truth appeared to be only an 
instance of ignorant arrogance greater than their own. They were so completely 
blinded by their insatiable passion for sensuous gratification that they were 
unable to distinguish between their own selfish vanity and the Arrogance of 
Sree Gaursundar which their own vanity necessitated and which was intended 
to break their impious perversity, or at any rate, to lessen the same, or prevent 
it from grossly misleading innocent people to the utter ruin of both. 

This Attitude of Sree Gaursundar was also in glaring contrast to that of the other 
Vaishnavas who did not care to oppose in this drastic manner the pretensions of 
those graceless atheists; but it was none the less best calculated to promote-the 
real well-being of all those who are disposed to draw a distinction between 
arrogance directed to the service of the Absolute and humility practiced with the 
same object in favour of the latter, make out difference which does not really 
exist. Real humility, that submits 



unconditionally to the Absolute, never submits to minister to the pleasures of the 
atheists. When those, who are not disposed to submit to the Absolute, pretend to 
be humble in their relations with worldly people, they do so for gaining the 
reputation of humility. The really humble person has no selfish ambition and is, 
therefore, in a position to serve the Truth and nothing but the Truth under all 
circumstances. The true and constant servants of the Absolute alone are 
privileged to understand how Godhead may be best served by loyal arrogance 
and most basely betrayed by self-seeking show of humility. Godhead is never 
served by external conduct. Good manners in themselves have no value. They 
have their value in and through perfect loyalty to the Truth, which is the one 
thing needful. Good manners, practiced by worldly people, are but a snare and a 
most insidious form of gross impiety. 

The above considerations enable us to understand that no one can know the Lord 
unless the Lord makes Himself known to him of His Own accord. 

Sree Gaursundar, during all this period while He was engaged in the task 
of silencing the proud scholars of the centre of learning of the Age by 
exposing their utter ignorance of all subjects, failed to be recognized as the Lord 
of all learning alike by pious Vaishnavas and the atheistical teachers of 
Nabadwip. But we need not suppose that His Activities were, therefore, less 
important or a lesser evidence of His highest beneficent Mercy. The Lord is ever 
full of unlimited beneficence; but He reserves the right of manifesting the true 
Nature of His Divine Activities only to such persons Whom He chooses to 
favour. During all the time that Gaursundar was indulging in these learned 
Pastimes not a single person in the whole Nabadwip recognized His Divinity, 
although these Performances were most extraordinary even from the point of 
view of empiric scholarship. In this connection the following remarkable 
incident, which took place at this time deserves our most attentive consideration. 

A great scholar of the name of Keshab Bhatta came to Nabadwip. He was a 
famous controversialist and had assumed the proud title of 'Conqueror of 
all quarters’ to proclaim His victories over the scholars of all parts and also as 
an open challenge to the learned whom he summoned to recognize 
his superiority if they did not venture to engage in open discussion through 
fear of public exposure of their inferiority. It was the traditional ambition of 
the Pandits of this country to seek the proud distinction of being the 
recognized superior of all learned persons, or as the Conqueror of all quarters, 

(digvijayi). The conditions, that such a claim gave rise to, were that the 
vanquished had to put down in writing the fact of their defeat and hand over to 



the victor their written confession of inferiority. 


Keshab Bhatta, after defeating in controversy the Pandits of other parts of the 
country, appeared in Nabadwip, which was then reputed as the greatest center of 
learning in India, with the object of compelling the great Pandits of Nabadwip 
also to admit his superior scholarship. Keshab Bhatta was fully confident of his 
ability to defeat the Pandits of Nabadwip for the reason that he had ordained the 
assurance of the goddess of learning herself to the effect that he would never 
suffer any defeat in controversy. Keshab Bhatta had discovered that all the 
Shastras appeared on the tip of his tongue without any effort on his part by the 
grace of the goddess of learning, and the questions, that constantly suggested 
themselves to him, were such that no antagonist was ever in a position to offer 
any satisfactory reply. His questions alone were sufficient to silence his 
adversary, and it never came to a discussion at all. When the fame of Nabadwip 
reached his ears he hastened thither in great state, escorted by a numerous 
retinue mounted on richly caparisoned horses and elephants, defeating m 
controversial encounters all those Pandits who met his challenge on the way. His 
arrival at Nabadwip caused a great fear to fall upon the community of the 
Pandits who took counsel together apprehending the imminent loss of the 
prestige which they enjoyed in the learned world if this ‘Conqueror of all 
quarters’ from afar succeeded in carrying off the laurels of victory by defeating 
them in their very stronghold. They were unnerved by fear at the prospect of 
contending with one whom Saraswati herself had been pleased to grant the boon 
of invincibility in controversy. All the leading Bhattacharyas of Nabadwip left 
off all work and racked their brains over their impending discomfiture. 

On every side the ominous cry was loudly expressed that the occasion had 
arrived which was to settle what gift of intellect the Pandits of Nabadwip really 
possessed. The students soon carried the tidings to Gauranga. ‘A certain 
Conqueror of the quarters (digvijayi), having won the favour of Saraswati, is 
touring all places and vanquishing in controversy all Pandits. He has in 
his possession the certificates of his victories from all the vanquished. He has 
a large following of horses, elephants, litters, attendants. He has recently 
arrived in the town and is actually settled in Nabadwip. He wants to engage 
in controversy any rival who may offer himself. If no antagonist is prepared 
to take up his challenge he demands that every learned association 
must forthwith supply him with written confession of their defeat. 

On hearing this the Lord laughingly told the truth to His pupils. Listen to Me, 



brothers. I am telling you the real truth. The Supreme Lord in no way tolerates 
self-conceit. The Lord always takes away whatsoever intoxicates a person to 
indulge in excessive vanity. Humility is the constant nature of the fruit-bearing 
tree as of a person endowed with all good qualities. Have you not heard of the 
fate of all the mightiest Conquerors of old such as Haihai, Nahusha, Bena, Bana, 
Naraka, Ravana ? Was there ever any person whose vanity was not brought low? 
Godhead never tolerates excessive conceit. For this reason I assure you that all 
the pride of his learning will be completely humbled at this very place,. 

Having said so, the Lord came on to the bank of the Ganges in the evening with 
His disciples and, having touched with reverence the holy water of the Ganges 
and made His obeisance to the sacred stream, Divine Gauranga assumed His 
Seat in the center of His pupils. The students sat round Him in many different 
groups, and a brisk and cheerful discussion went forward regarding many a topic 
on dharma and the Shastras. As the Lord was seated in this joyous manner He 
thought of a plan of conquering the ‘Conqueror of all quarters’. He did not like 
the idea of defeating him in open controversy in a public assembly, as such 
defeat would kill outright the Brahmana who was so much puffed up with 
inordinate vanity by reason of his victories which had filled him with the notion 
that he had no equal in the whole world. Moreover such defeat would also 
expose him to the jeers and violence of the populace who would fall upon him 
and plunder his belongings. If the Brahmana were vanquished in a private 
encounter he would be cured of his vanity without suffering the terrible pain of a 
public exposure. While the Lord was maturing His plan ‘the Conqueror of all 
quarters' himself came to the very spot that evening. 

What ensued after the arrival of ‘the Conqueror of all quarters,’ has been 
graphically described in all its bearings by Thakur Brindavandas. The night was 
most beautifully illuminated by the gorgeous splendours of the clear moon of 
Bengal. The Bhagirathi wore her most hallowed aspect of indescribable glory. 
The Supreme Lord, Whose Beauty captivates the hearts of everything, was 
Himself Present with all His disciples. The charming Face of the Lord was 
constantly lit up with a Gracious Smile and His Two Beautiful Eyes wore the 
Eternal Look of Divine Benediction. His Fine Teeth, set between His Ruddy 
Lips, scorned the beauty of pearls. His Whole Frame was most delicately soft 
and overflowed with kindness. His Beautiful Head wore a profusion of the most 
charming curls of the Finest Hair. His Neck was posed like the Lion’s. His 
Shoulders were broad as that of the elephant. His Attire was in keeping with His 
Figure. The Holy Form was of the most generous dimensions, with a most 



Beautiful Bosom which was encircled by Sree Anantadeva in the Form of the 
sacrificial thread. His Fine Forehead was marked with the long beautiful tilaka 
pointing upwards. His Exquisite Hands reached to the Knee. The Lord wore His 
Cloth in the style of the yoga patta and, being Seated with His Right Foot placed 
in the loop of the Left Thigh, was engaged d in expounding the Shastras, 
establishing the contraries of all negative and positive conclusions. All His 
disciples were seated in many a group, on different sides of Him, and formed a 
most picturesque Assembly. 

The Conqueror of all quarters’ was much surprised on beholding this wonderful 
Sight and thought within himself, Ts This perhaps Nimai Pandit?, and, stopping 
unnoticed, gazed on the Beauty of the Lord without taking off his eyes for a long 
time. He then inquired of one of the disciples, ‘What is His Name?, and was told 
in reply, ‘He is, indeed, the Great Nimai Pandit Himself’. Thereupon, making his 
obeisance to the Ganges, ‘the Conqueror’ made his way into the midst of the 
Assembly of the Lord. A Slight Smile played round the Lips of the Lord as He 
welcomed him with cordiality, inviting him to take his seat. 

‘The Conqueror of all quarters’ was of a most fearless disposition. But 
nevertheless he experienced a feeling of great awe at the Sight of the Lord. 

The Lord, after exchanging a few words with the Brahmana, began to 
he inquisitive in His Joyous Mood. He began by observing ‘that the poetic 
powers of ‘the Conqueror’ were boundless and there was no subject to which he 
could not apply his powers with success. That they would all be delivered from 
their sins if he would favour them with a poetic account of the glories of the 
holy Ganges.’ On hearing these words of the Lord ‘the Conqueror’ 
began immediately the praise of the Ganges in verses composed on the spot and 
with such facility and in such varied figures that his recitation appeared to 
possess the amplitude and dignity of the voice of the clouds. Saraswati herself 
was present on the tongue of ‘the Conqueror,’ and, therefore whatever he said 
was perfect in every way. 

No human being possessed the power of impeaching the same or even 
comprehending the full extent of the profound learning that marked 
his utterances. All the students of the Lord, who were counted by 
thousands, were astonished by listening to the description. ‘Rama, Rama,’ they 
ejaculated, ‘It is most wonderful! Can such words come from any mortal?’ 

The description was most richly laden in every part with all the 

rhetorical embellishments conceivable for adorning the human speech, that are 



to be found in the whole world, and to such supreme perfection that even 
those, who were deeply versed in all branches of the Shastras, found it most 
difficult even to follow him. In this fashion ‘the Conqueror’ poke on for the 
space of a quarter of the night and did not yet finish. 

When ‘the Conqueror’ at last ceased Sree Gaursundar said laughingly ‘that the 
real purpose of the words, woven into the verses by him, was not intelligible to 
them unless he himself was pleased to explain. He would, therefore, request ‘the 
Conqueror, to supply the explanation of his own words which were undoubtedly 
perfect in their import.’ These sweet Words of the Lord induced ‘the Conqueror’ 
to an attempt to explain his own verses. But no sooner did he begin to expound 
the Lord began to criticize at every step. The Lord said in effect ‘that the words 
that had been employed by ‘the Conqueror’ apparently transgressed against all 
the established principles of the Shastras and that it was, therefore, necessary to 
know all other special purpose which ‘the Conqueror’ had in view in using 
them.’ 

The great ‘Conqueror of all quarters,’ the pet child of the goddess of learning, 
the victor of a hundred controversies, was powerless to offer any 
explanation, and all his intelligence seemed to desert him at this crisis. The 
Brahmana began to talk at random, but could establish nothing; and Sree 
Gauranga was most prompt in pointing out all the defects of his arguments. All 
the genius of ‘the Conqueror’ forsook him and he did not understand what he 
himself had said. Then the Lord asked Him not to mind it but give them 
something fresh. But ‘the Conqueror’ found that he no longer possessed his 
former power of impromptu composition. 

When ‘the Conqueror of all quarters’ was in the throes of the agony of his 
decisive defeat the pupils of the Lord made a gesture of laughter at his 
expense. But the Lord forbade all incivility and spoke kindly to the Brahmana. 
‘The Conqueror’ had made an exhausting effort by composing those 
wonderful verses and was naturally very much fatigued by his exertions. The 
night was far advanced. So the controversy might be postponed to the next day. 
Let them all part for that night with mutual good-will and ‘the Conqueror, should 
return to his lodgings for rest without feeling discouraged,. The Lord was ever 
tender to His opponents in His Dealings with them. Those, whom He vanquished 
in controversy, did not experience any sorrow. The Lord behaved in the same 
way towards all the Professors of Nabadwip. Although. He defeated them all, 

He pleased them all by His Conduct after His victory. ‘Let us,’ He would say, 



‘Go home to-day and look up our authorities so that we might be in a position 
to answer everything correctly tomorrow . 5 The Lord never broke the spirit of 
the vanquished. Hence all were pleased with Him. Such were the Pastimes of 
the Lord. It was for this reason that every one, of all those Pandits who lived 
at Nabadwip, was in his heart of hearts well-disposed towards the Lord. 

The Lord made His way home in the company of His disciples. ‘The Conqueror 
of all quarters’ felt extremely ashamed at heart. In his distress the Brahmana thus 
mused within himself, ‘Saraswati herself gave me this boon. I have met in 
controversy all those who were well versed in Nyaya Shankhya, Patanjala, 
Mimansa, Vaiseshika and Vedanta philosophies. I found none in the whole world 
who could even advance a plausible view in opposition to mine.’ The question of 
their ability to defeat me was, therefore, necessarily remote. But such is the 
contrivance of Providence that this Brahmana, Who is merely a teacher of 
Vyakarana which is a subject for infants, should be able to actually defeat me! 
The boon of Saraswati herself would seem to be unsure ! There is good cause for 
the greatest anxiety in this. Some offense against the goddess must have been 
engendered in myself and due to this the power of my genius has been lessened. 

I must find out the cause of it this very day., Thinking thus the Brahmana sat 
down to the recitation of the mantra and, having finished the due quota, betook 
himself to his bed with a sorrowful heart. In his dream Saraswati appeared 
before the Bipra and, casting her merciful glance on the fortunate Brahmana, 
began to tell him secrets that are most carefully hidden in the Scriptures. 
Saraswati said,, Listen, good Brahmana. I am going to tell you the hidden secret 
of the Vedas. If you disclose this to any one your life will assuredly be cut short. 
He, at Whose Hands you have suffered defeat, is most assuredly the Lord of the 
endless universe. He is, indeed, the Self-same Lord Whose Lotus Feet I ever 
serve. I feel ashamed of myself even to appear before Him. My function is to 
delude all creatures into the vanities of the false ego. This function has no 
admission into the Sphere that is lighted up by the Glance of Vasudeva. It is I 
who speak through your tongue. But I have no power in His Divine Presence. It 
is not merely my little self who feels so helpless but even the Divine Sheshadeva 
Himself, Who expounds the Vedas by His thousand Mouths and is the 
Worshipped of Aja, Bhaba and all the great gods, is bewildered in the Presence 
of the Supreme Lord Whom you have seen face to face in the Form of the 
Brahmana. He is Transcendentally Great, Eternal, Pure, Indivisible, Irredible and 
is Present in His Fullness in the hearts of all. From Him proceeds work, 
knowledge, learning, all good and evil, the visible and the invisible, in fact 
everything which it is not possible for me to fully recount to you. All the 



creatures from Brahma downwards who are subject to suffering undergo 
tribulation by His Command. All the Avataras, such as the Fish, Tortoise, etc., of 
Whom you have heard, are no other than He. It is the Same Lord Who restores 
the world in His form of the Boar, the Same Who protects Prahlada in His Form 
of Man-lion. He is the Life of Bali in His Form of Vamana Whose Lotus Feet are 
the Source of the holy Ganges. It is He Who Appeared in Ayodhya and killed the 
wicked Ravana by His Endless Wonderful Activities. Him we call the Son of 
Vasudeva and Nanda. He is at present, as the Son of Brahmana, actively engaged 
in the Pleasures of learning. Not even the Veda Himself is aware of His 
Appearance in the world. One can know Him only if He makes Himself known. 
Who has power to know otherwise? All the mantras, that you have recited to me 
up till now, are not really fulfilled by yielding as their fruit the status of ‘the 
Conqueror of all quarters’. The real fruit of my mantra you have at last obtained 
only now , in as much as you have had a Direct Sight of the Lord of the 
countless worlds. Bipra, go quickly to His Feet and surrender your body to Him. 
Don’t consider these words as an idle dream. I have divulged to you the hidden 
knowledge of the Vedas under the influence of the mantra. Saying this the 
goddess Saraswati disappeared and the Brahmana woke up from his sleep. 

The Brahmana immediately made his way, at early dawn, to the Presence of the 
Lord. The Bipra made prostrated obeisances to the Lord Who thereupon lifted 
him up into His Arms. The Lord asked, ‘Brother, what is the meaning of this 
behaviour?’ The Bipra made reply, ‘Even so is the Merciful Glance of Thy eyes’. 
The Lord asked, Being yourself ‘Conqueror of all quarters’ why do you behave 
in this way to Me? ‘The Conqueror’ said, ‘Deign to listen, Prince of Brahmanas’ 
All work is fulfilled by serving Thee. Thou art Narayana in the Form of the 
twice-born in the Kali Age. Who has power to recognize Thee? The suspicion 
grew in my mind the moment my power of speech deserted me as Thou 
questioned. Thou art declared by all the scriptures to be the Breaker of all 
worldly vanity. I have truly experienced this undoubted truth. Thou overcame me 
three times and yet preserved my reputation. Is this possible Otherwise than by 
the Power of the Supreme Lord Himself? Wherefore it is most certain that Thou 
art Narayana. In all the learned societies of the world, in Gauda, Trihut, Delhi, 
Kasi, Gujrat, Vijayanagar, Kanchipuri, Anga. 

Vanga, Tailanga, Odhra and other places, there is no scholar who could even 
understand my words, far less find fault with them. I, who am so clever, failed to 
establish anything in Thy Presence. Whither did all my wits depart? This Feat of 
Thine is not at all wonderful. The goddess of learning herself told me that Thou 



art her Lord. Most auspicious, indeed, was the planetary conjunction under 
which I let my foot at Nabadwip, that I, so sunk in the deep mire of the world, 
have obtained the Sight even of Thyself. Bewitched by the wily entanglements 
of ignorant selfish desires I have long wandered astray, utterly deceiving myself. 
By good fortune I have now obtained the Sight of Thee. Be pleased to deliver me 
by Thy Merciful Glance. It is Thy Nature to do good to all. There is no one 
except Thyself Who is the Refuge and Who is Truly Merciful. Be pleased, Great 
One, so to instruct me that there may never again arise any evil desire in my 
mind. 

The ‘Conqueror of all quarters,’ most humbled, praised the Lord in many various 
ways, in terms of sincere penitence. On hearing the fervent words of the 
Brahmana Sree Gaursundar smiled as He thus Replied, ‘Listen, 
illustrious Brahmana. You, on whose tongue Saraswati herself abides, are, 
indeed, most fortunate. The use of learning does not lie in conquering all 
quarters. That scholarship alone is genuine which serves the Supreme Lord. 
Consider this well and attentively. When a person leaves his body his wealth or 
any human qualifications never accompany their quondam possessor. It is for 
this reason that all who are pure-souled, apply themselves with a firm purpose to 
serve the Supreme Lord, discarding every other occupation. Therefore, Bipra, 
giving up all evil ways make haste to worship the Feet of Sree Krishna without 
delay, and continue to serve Krishna with firm conviction until you are overtaken 
by death. Know for certain that the only due fruit of learning is obtained if 
one’s mind and work continue to abide thereby at the Lotus Feet of Sree 
Krishna. I declare to you the highest advice. Devotion to Vishnu is the one thing 
that is true in all these countless worlds’. Having said so, the Supreme Lord 
being pleased with the Brahmana, embraced him. Being favoured by the 
Embrace of the Lord of Vaikuntha the twice-born was released from all his 
worldly fetters. The Lord said, ‘Brahmana, give up all vanity. Betake to the 
service of Krishna by being merciful to all beings. Whatever Saraswati might 
have told you, never divulge to any one else. By speaking out the Hidden Truth 
of the Scriptures the span of life is cut short and such a person verily suffers the 
bad consequences of such conduct in the next world.’ 

The great Brahmana, on receiving the Command of the Lord and after making 
many prostrated obeisances to Him and repeatedly doing homage to His 
Lotus Feet, departed thence, having thus obtained the highest fulfillment of all 
his endeavours. By the Command of the Lord that very instant devotion, want 
of attachment to things mundane and the true knowledge manifested 



themselves simultaneously in the person of that Brahmana. The vanity of being 
‘Conqueror of all quarters’ completely disappeared. The Bipra became humbler 
than a blade of grass. After bestowing on fit persons the gift of every earthly 
possession that he had, his elephants, horses, conveyances, wealth and all 
equipments, that ‘Conqueror of all quarters’ set out on his journey 
companionless. Such is the Pastime of Sree Gaursundar. It is the Natural Quality 
of His Mercy that a person, who obtains it, betakes himself to the occupation of 
begging, giving up the kingly state. In this Kali Age Sree Dabirkhas bore 
testimony to the truth of this by preferring the retreat of the forest to a princely 
position. Wealth and power, which are coveted by all the world, are discarded by 
the servant of Krishna after having been gained. The state of a king and such 
other temporal things, are deemed pleasant only just so long as one is ignorant of 
the bliss of devotion. Even the pleasure of emancipation from all the miseries of 
the world is considered by the devotees of Krishna as trivial, not to speak of 
such happiness as accrues from the possession of kingdoms and other coveted 
things of this world. Nothing is of any worth except the Kind Glance of the 
Supreme Lord; for which reason all the Scriptures proclaim only the service of 
the Lord. 

Thus did ‘the Conqueror of all quarters’ obtain his final deliverance. Such is the 
wonderful Career of Sree Gaursundar. The news of the Lord’s victory over ‘the 
Conqueror’ quickly spread to all parts of Nadia. All the people 
were overwhelmed with astonishment and instinctively realized ‘that Nimai 
Pandit was undoubtedly a Very Great Scholar. They had not yet heard of 
another scholar who could have defeated ‘the Conqueror’. They confessed that 
Nimai Pandit had every justification for His Pride and it was only now that the 
Real Greatness of His Learning was made patent to all. Some said ‘If He had 
only read Nyaya He could have easily attained the position of Bhattacharyas’. 
Some proposed ‘that all the people should join together and confer on Him the 
title of Vadisimha (Lion of controversy).’ These estimates, says 
Thakur Brindavandas, show the triumph of His Deluding Power who prevented 
the people from recognizing His Divinity, even after they had seen all this. 

Thus all over Nadia all the people discoursed about the Achievement of the 
Lord. The citizens of Nabadwip are worthy of the homage of everybody 
inasmuch as they are privileged to witness these Activities of the Lord. Those, 
adds Thakur Brindavandas, who listen to this Narration of the Victory of the 
Lord over ‘the Conqueror of all quarters’, never have any further occasion of 
suffering defeat in their own case. We reserve the treatment of this remark of 
Thakur Brindavandas for the next chapter. 



Chapter 18 Significance of Scholastic Triumphs 


I have tried to reproduce almost verbatim the account of Sree Thakur 
Brindavandas in describing the controversial triumph of Nimai Pandit over 
‘the Conqueror, of all quarters’. Technical details of the controversy also have 
been handed down to us in the Narrative of the same event in the immortal work 
of Sree Krishnadas Kaviraj Goswami. The shloka which was condemned by 
Sree Gaursundar runs as follows:— 

mahatvam gangayah satatamidamavati nitaram yadesa shree-vishnoshcharana 
kamalotpattisubkaga dvitiya shree lakshmiriva 

suranarairarchyacharana bhabanibharturya shirasi bibhavatyad bhutaguna. 

Sree Gaursundar pointed out in detail the defective disposition and use of words 
and the incorrectness of rhetorical embellishments used in the shloka, while 
admitting specific excellences. He observed that the five principal defects 
pointed out by Him were the most prominent ones; but there were also other and 
numerous minor defects. He said that the productions of the greatest poets such 
as Kalidas, Bhababhuti, Jayadeva, etc., were not also free from all defects; and 
so it was not necessary for ‘the Conqueror’ to be discouraged, inasmuch as he 
certainly possessed the poetic genius which is so rare. 

The power of learning, that ever serves the Supreme Lord, does not mislead any 
one; but worldly learning always misleads her votaries. This is not the Age-long 
controversy of Theology versus Natural Science; as both of them are equally the 
products of the erring reason of man. The issue is the higher one. Is the Absolute 
attainable by empiric knowledge ? Nimai Pandit held the view that empiric 
knowledge is necessarily defective, i.e., untrue, by the standard of the Absolute. 
Instead of helping us to find the Truth empiric knowledge produces a delusive 
belief in the sufficiency of itself, and thus acts as an obstacle in the way of the 
search of the Truth. 

All mental speculation as a matter of fact is non-spiritual by its unavoidable 
neglect to make due allowance for inherent limitations. It is never possible 
for the reason of man to discover the Absolute Truth by its unavoidably 
limited speculative efforts. ‘The Conqueror of all quarters’ was, however, aware 
of this. He knew, what ordinary scholars will be hardly prepared to admit, that it 
was the goddess of learning who was the cause of his genius. If this were 



fully admitted by everybody then all differences, detectable in such 
knowledge, would be proved to be fictitious, and be at once seen as due to the 
operation of an invisible controlling Power who also produces and keeps up the 
idea of human merit as the resultant of human effort. The Conqueror’ was aware 
of the conditional nature of his knowledge. But ‘the Conqueror’ himself had 
not realized the utter delusiveness of all worldly learning. He accordingly 
aspired to the fame of being the acknowledged leading scholar of the world. The 
greatest theologians and the greatest scientists are but puppets in the hands of 
the goddess of illusion, if either of them suppose that they can know the Truth 
by their limited effort. 

Sree Jiva Goswami prabhu is not a controversialist of the mundane stamp. His 
arguments can never be really grasped by even the greatest Or empiric 
thinkers of this world. Sree Jiva Goswami refutes his antagonists by arguments 
that are intelligible to empiricists for overthrowing the conclusions of a faulty 
system. He however, knew that he was actually the channel of communication of 
the one Living Indivisible Knowledge to all impartial understandings in the 
Form of the Articulated Transcendental Sound. Sree Jiva Goswami’s sole 
ambition was to serve as the unobstructive medium of the Divine 
Communication. He is, as a matter of fact, not in the scale of comparison with 
the empiric scholars of this world. All comparison between one empiric scholar 
and another is mundane and delusive. The futile speculation of one man is by its 
nature challengeable by the equally abortive rival speculation of another man. 
This opens the way to the vicious cycle of the endless and inconclusive 
controversy that passes in the name of theology. All this controversy is untrue 
and never takes us an inch in the direction of the Truth. In the picturesque 
language of Srimad Bhagavatam it is futile to expect the discovery of the grain 
by thrashing the empty chaff. Empiric knowledge has not legs to stand upon. It 
rests on unproved and unprovable assumptions. It assumes the principle of 
limitation itself as the basis of its search for the Unlimited! Can there be 
conceived a greater or more absurd form of self-deception than this? 

‘The Conqueror’ was the favoured protigi of the goddess of the delusive empiric 
learning. All the empiric sciences accordingly yielded up their whole wealth (?) 
of hypothetical truths ( ?) to him, without any acquisitive effort on his part. The 
ideal of the empiric quest is the unrealizable wild-goose of the fable. Let 
us suppose that it is possible for one to know everything that it is possible 
or desirable for one to know and whenever one is in actual need of 
such knowledge. Will the possession of such power yield, or produce in such 



a person the inclination for, the Absolute Truth? If I could attain every 
facility that is conceivable to the human reason as desirable possession without 
any effort, would it be the really satisfactory state of existence that it is 
conceived to be? This was the actual condition of The Conqueror of all quarters? 
But he felt as solitary as Faust himself ‘in his bad eminence’. But there is no 
Tempter except one’s own boundless vanity of the hankering for empiric 
knowledge. The attempt to shift the responsibility of our sons to the shoulders of 
a third party, is most disingenuous since it is so easy to explain our own 
responsibility for our sins without the profanity of any such deliberately 
dishonest assumptions! 

The paltry reason of man, when it takes upon itself to shape its own course, finds 
itself reaping the harvest of its deliberate folly. It could foresee well enough the 
inevitable consequences of its attempt to dominate the world, if it could only 
properly exercise the sense of its responsibility for its acts, which it undoubtedly 
possesses. The exercise of the egotistic principle, on the part of a being with 
limited faculties of knowledge, is bound to lead to discord and misery. The plea 
is sometimes advanced that the miseries of this world are unreal. They do not 
really affect those who possess sufficient firmness of disposition. This is the 
Stoic’s philosophy. But it is the most fatal form of all delusions. It is hardly 
prepared to deny the reality of misery in the case of those who do not possess the 
required imaginary firmness of disposition. It finds itself occupied in applauding 
the qualities of the unfeeling stone and the hardened criminal. This mechanical 
‘unconcern’ is not capable of being recognized even by the limited intellect as 
the ideal of human perfection. The miseries of this world are not really ended by 
such suicidal policy. It is necessary to seek out the true cause of our miseries 
for effecting their real and lasting cure. Empiric science is, at any rate, free 
from the killing vice of callousness of the Stoics. Its defect is not that it at 
all undertakes to search for the Truth; but that it deliberately undertakes to 
do this in the evidently wrong way. The empiric optimist is, 
however, nevertheless cousin-german of the empiric pessimist. The forte of both 
is an egregious egotism which both of them mistake for the principle of 
their coveted individuality and personality and for which they heroically 
prepare themselves to take all fictitious risks. This is no doubt rank atheism. 
Which is the antagonist against whom all this preparation is directed. There is 
no Satan in this world except one’s own avoidable egotistic vanity. 


‘The Conqueror of all quarters’ was happily disillusioned and gave up all 
worldly ambition to follow the true spiritual path. It is necessary to consider the 



means by which such a result was produced, as also the nature of the change 
itself. This great change was wrought by the Mercy of Sree Gaursundar. The 
goddess of learning directed ‘the Conqueror’ to the Feet of Nimai Pandit. The 
same goddess was thus performing a double and apparently 
contradictory function. She had herself hitherto produced the delusion from 
which she now chose to rescue her victim. For the previous sufferings of ‘the 
Conqueror’ the goddess was not to blame at all. She is ever contriving to save 
the perverse soul from the consequences of his suicidal folly, without allowing 
him to succeed in actually destroying himself. Her function is like that of the 
wise mother who deludes her wayward child with toys that have no intrinsic 
worth in order to wean the naughty child from the consequences, present and 
prospective, of his wantonness. The culpable egotistic sentiment is inherent in 
free cognition and is controllable only by the conviction of its possessor that it is 
wrong. This is at once the privilege and the danger of the soul of man poised 
between the spiritual and mundane worlds. The jiva possesses as his birthright 
perfect freedom to abuse his cognitive liberty. The empiric sciences of this 
world provide the scope for the abuse of his liberty. The sciences themselves are 
not to blame for this. As a matter of fact they are never created by, but are 
only communicated to, the mind of man. ‘The Conqueror’ had realized this 
truth. Modern scientists, as a rule, do not admit this. Nor do they admit its 
corollary that the empiric sciences only serve to conceal the Truth more 
effectively. This last fact was also unknown to ‘the Conqueror’. But inasmuch as 
he was fortunately immune from the more fatal of the above two defects he 
proved to be of a more governable disposition. Mother Saraswathi accordingly 
directed him to the Lord Who alone could deliver him from his ignorance. It is 
only by the positive Appearance of the Truth that untruth loses its power over us. 

The Supreme Lord is the Sole Director of all the power of learning. We want our 
so-called acquired learning to serve our own selfish purposes, and not 
for serving the purpose of the Lord. But learning refuses to serve any one 
except the Lord. When she seems to serve us she only puts on a deceptive 
appearance, in order to delude us for our benefit, by the Will of the Lord. This 
deception is continued as long as we retain the least inclination to be her master. 
As a matter of fact we can never be her master. We serve her even when she 
seems to serve us although this is contrived by her with such consummate skill 
that we find ample scope for serving her purpose even by our vanity of being 
her master. It is our own irrational attitude that is solely responsible for 
the deception, that is thus provided by the Mercy of the Supreme Lord for 
our redemption. 



The goddess of learning ever serves the Supreme Lord and she serves only Him. 
This is inconceivable to our limited understanding. We are ever striving to learn 
the so-called deluding secrets of Nature. Such striving would be meaningless if 
we didn’t expect to be rewarded with success in the shape of the attainment of 
material results yielding worldly facilities. The power to be able to compose 
impromptu verses is one of such facilities. The verses actually composed by The 
Conqueror’ were in praise of the holy Ganges; and such performance might, 
therefore, appear to have been of a spiritual nature. But The Conqueror’ was 
praising the Ganges only in order to win fame for himself. Every learned activity 
of empiric reason necessarily aims at some such definite selfish result. Empiric 
learning has its face always and necessarily directed towards the selfish interests 
of its ignorant victim. 

The so-called disinterested pursuit of knowledge for its own sake, so loudly 
advertised by the empiric pedants, is a misnomer as applied to the inductive and 
deductive processes of the mental principle professing to engage itself 
in unraveling the so-called mysteries of the mundane world. It is not at 
all disinterested.. Behind it all lies the insincere conviction that knowledge 
will bring power to its possessor. It is the possession and enjoyment of 
power over Nature that can be the only logical goal of all worldly learning. 

However proud we may be of this learning it is permissible to question the 
conclusion that it has any real use for us. Is not the whole affair an example of 
repeating a foolish experiment even after its exposure? We are apt to assume that 
our knowledge is the cause of the so-called progress of mundane civilization. We 
are punished and disillusioned by the ever-present possibility of the wheels of 
this worldly civilization irrevocably going back at any moment. If knowledge 
has to be kept up to the teaching of experience by the process of its constant 
revision, is it not thereby proved to be always really inapplicable to any event? If 
what we are pleased, on insufficient grounds, to call the cause of an event, turns 
out to be no such thing, can we blame anybody excepting ourselves for 
neglecting this foregone conclusion? 

The laws of Mathematics, we say, have proved perfectly reliable ever since the 
dawn of human civilization, and are accordingly inferred to be absolutely 
true; and it is also expected that they will remain true for all time. There are 
certain so called fundamental principles which are also supposed to be true. All 
this is, on the face of it, self-contradictory. What then is the real value of 
this experience ? The whole position is entirely relative to the nature of our 



present senses and shares all their defects. The senses do not give us the 
correct information. Our unbiased reason tells us that they cannot also give us 
the true information, as the temporary have no capacity of apprehending the 
Absolute Reality. The knowledge, that our senses yield, is one of the 
changing phenomena of this world. It cannot understand itself. 

If it were possible to know the Truth would we still have the temporary use of 
our empiric knowledge? The Conqueror’, at any rate, gave up once for all 
any further acquisitive effort. He must have realized the utter uselessness of 
such knowledge. We learn that he lived to write theological works that have 
come down to us embodying his reasons for forsaking the empiric quest. So 
his activities did not stop altogether. But a race of theological writers and priests 
by themselves do not supply the ideal state of worldly existence. The world 
is sufficiently bad as it is. But it would be worse by such a change for the 
reason that even material civilization is preferable to fanatical barbarism. But are 
we absolutely sure that material civilization or material barbarism is producible 
by the effort of the will of man? The philosophical answer should be in 
the negative. 

But if we change the form of the question and ask, Ts the knowledge of the 
Absolute Truth attainable by man?’ we at once find the right track. 

The Conqueror’ was evidently satisfied that it is possible to know the Truth. 

Our responsibility in the matter is very great indeed. If the Truth is knowable 
we cannot be excused if we deliberately neglect to find Him. It is said that 
the Truth is to be found in the Scriptures. This is denied by the 
Upanishads which declare that there are two kinds of learning or knowledge, 
viz., (1) the transcendental knowledge, and (2) knowledge that is not so. The 
Vedas and all branches of study are classed as the text books of non- 
transcendental learning. The transcendental learning is declared to be that by 
which the Transcendental Truth is known. The Bhagavatam declares that if a 
person, who is thoroughly versed in the Scriptures, be not conversant with 
the transcendental, then his efforts in the acquisition and preservation of 
such learning have no more value than the labour that is wasted in tending a 
dry cow. A distinction is made between the phenomenal and the 
transcendental. Learning as such, whether in the form of Theology or otherwise, 
is lumped together as non transcendental. The knowledge of the Scriptures is 
not differentiated from that of any other branch of study. Neither is 
knowledge condemned. It is declared that non-transcendental knowledge is 
subordinate to the transcendental and that the possession of the 



transcendental knowledge automatically and perfectly settles our relation to 
nontranscendental knowledge and teaches us the proper use of 
empiric knowledge. We need not be haunted with the impertinent fears of 
a conspiracy for the suppression or preservation of material civilization. 

The question at issue does not affect our material prospects which are quite 
safe in the hands of Providence. But the method to be pursued seriously concerns 
the prospects of the individual soul for regaining his natural spiritual condition. 

Transcendental Knowledge cannot be acquired by the inductive or deductive 
empiric processes. The first step that is to be taken in the direction of 
the attainment of such knowledge, is to try to be convinced of the necessity 
of submitting to receive Him at the Hands of the Supreme Lord. 

Godhead Himself is the Absolute Knowledge. He alone can make Himself 
known to us. He is Free in His Choice to make Himself known to us. We also 
may or may not want to know Him. We do not really want to know Him so long 
as we do not want to serve Him. The Supreme Lord may be known only by 
the method of complete submission. Perfect submission is an 
indispensable condition of the attainment of such knowledge. The necessity and 
nature of complete submission is not conceivable except by the Mercy of the 
Lord. 

The Lord is spontaneously All-merciful. We come under the Influence of His 
Mercy the moment we are at all really inclined to submit to Him. 

This inclination is sometimes produced by the shock of utter 

worldly humiliation. It was so in the case of ‘the Conqueror’. It came to him as 

the consequence of his defeat in controversy by the Lord. 

The Mercy of the Supreme Lord often comes in the shape of defeat and 
humiliation. No one except the actual recipient of the Divine Favour 
can perceive His Appearance. We gather all this from the writings of Keshab 
Bhatta himself who was favoured by the Supreme Lord. 

The goddess of learning ever serves her Lord. She directs the erring empiric 
scholar to the Real Knowledge when he is at all inclined to serve the Truth. 

The endless experiments with the finite, that now-a-days absorb all intellectual 
efforts of man, are not undertaken for the purpose of finding the Truth. Very few 
of those who busy themselves with the acquisition of worldly learning and fewer 
still of those who attain fame and success(?) in such pursuit, attain to the 



inclination to suspect the utter worthlessness of empiric scholarship in itself. 
They seldom seriously put the question to themselves, ‘What shall we do with 
this deluding and changing knowledge?’ Most people take it for granted that 
empiric knowledge is desirable because it is valued by all people of this world. It 
is supposed to increase our chances of happiness ( ?) It is only those, who do not 
feel sufficiently satisfied by the prospect, who ask the further question, ‘What is 
the value of the proposed happiness itself?’ 

It is in this last form that the call for the quest of the Absolute makes its first 
appearance to the individual consciousness. So long as the lure of 
worldly prospects continue to dominate the mind one can hardly be expected to 
pay any serious attention to the voice of the higher reason that is always 
speaking to everybody from within. It is only when a person actually shapes his 
external conduct in conformity with such prompting that he is in a position to 
obtain the realized Mercy of the Supreme Lord. Vanity in all its forms stands in 
the way of our real conversion to the free spiritual service of the Absolute. 

Sree Gaursundar showed His Extraordinary Mercy to ‘the Conqueror of all 
quarters’ by defeating him in controversy in such a way that the vanquished was 
enabled to realize, for the first time in his life, his own utter helplessness in the 
Presence of a mere Boy Who taught nothing higher than vyakarana. This proved 
to be an exceptionally favourable spiritual conjunction for ‘the Conqueror’ who 
was actually enabled to realize its supreme significance for himself by the grace 
of the goddess of learning whom he had worshipped so long for a vain purpose. 

It is likely that really great scholars may be in a slightly better position than 
others to be able to realize the utter worthlessness of all empiric 
scholarly achievements. But it is rarely that this saving truth is rightly grasped 
and acted upon by any one in this world of his own accord. The spiritual instinct, 
the effective hankering for the unalloyed Tmth, is not the result of any worldly 
merit or demerit. But as soon as the first dim reflection of the light of Tmth 
begins to irradiate the dark chambers of the mind, it automatically drives out the 
desire of all worldly possession. The mind realizes that the Truth has made His 
Appearance, not as the result of the intensity of its professed quest for the Truth 
of Whom it had no idea previously, but in spite of its bungling activity calculated 
to shut Him out altogether. 


The process of spiritual enlightenment is not of the nature of the last term of a 
continued mathematical series, neither does it result in the destruction of 



all previous experience. It should rather be regarded as the fulfillment of 
all previous activities. With the Appearance of the Absolute, however, there is 
an end of all deficiency, unwholesomeness and ignorance we now know the 
Full Truth, and, in this sense, enlightenment is its own fulfillment. It also 
disillusionizes. The whole body of the old knowledge is seen to be 
utterly insubstantial and positively delusive. The shadow had all along been 
mistaken for the substance. The nature of the shadow is truly realizable only 
after one’s acquaintance with the substance. There is then no more chance of the 
shadow being mistaken for the substance. 

It is no doubt a rude shock to be awakened in this manner. ‘The Conqueror’ 
confessed that the first suspicion that he had of the actual Approach of the Truth, 
was caused by his absolute collapse at the very Sight of the Lord. The darkness, 
which had been so fondly cherished, was found powerless to oppose the Advent 
of the Living Light. The first experience of the transcendental requires to be 
carefully distinguished from the invasion of hallucination. The transcendental is 
not anything that is opposed to the laws of physical Nature. It is not any thing 
abnormal. It is not a monstrosity. It neither confounds nor stupefies, but 
enlightens. It does not destroy anything except ignorance. We understand for the 
first time the real meaning of all those things with which we had been already 
familiar. All this happens without any initiative on one’s part and by the mere 
Sight of the Truth Who is no other than the Divine Person Himself. 

The goddess of learning told ‘the Conqueror’ that he had at last gained the real 
reward of his devotion to her by obtaining the Sight of the Lord. But, as a matter 
of fact, Sree Gaursundar was being actually seen by all the people of Nadia, who 
failed to experience any such spiritual consequences. There is a difference 
between worldly seeing and spiritual seeing. The term ‘seeing’ has to be used to 
express the new process in order to make the fact at all intelligible to the 
ignorant people of the world: But spiritual seeing is very different from although 
certainly analogous to the process of worldly seeing. In the former the Object to 
be seer takes the initiative, while in the latter the initiative seems to lie with the 
person who sees. That, which we seem to see on our own initiative, is the 
shadow. In such seeing we approach only such objects that are bound to show 
themselves to us the moment we choose to look at them. The object has no 
option but to be seen. Nay, it is bound to submit itself to the inspection of our 
senses as soon as we are in a position to choose to inspect. This process 
of knowing applies only to matter, limited existence or the shadow. 

The substantive Reality is spiritual and possesses the initiative. 



Why do we never see the soul of man ? Because we are content with the sight of 
the material case which seems readily enough to submit to our 
sensuous inspection. The material eye sees, can see, only matter. The soul does 
not see matter as substance. He is not under the necessity of curtailing or 
distorting his naturally perfect vision. One is no loser if his faculty of vision 
ceases to be eclipsable by the interposition of an opaque body. The soul sees, 
through all obstacles, the object. He sees the obstacle as the enveloping shadow 
of the substance. There is thus no loss of cognitive power by the spiritual 
process. 

The soul, in his normal state of uneclipsed spiritual condition is privileged to 
have the sight of the reality. This privilege he forfeits the moment he begins to 
function in this material world. His faculty of vision is eclipsed, as he now sees 
through the coloured glasses of the material eyes, which function is on the level 
of the plane of this world. But he is no gainer by the change as his knowledge of 
his own self is also correspondingly obscured. 

The conditioned soul functions in this world by allowing himself to be 
personated by a material substance which he is compelled to mistake for himself. 
But his adventitious second self is not really his servant, but always behaves as 
his master and makes him undergo in proxy the disappointments of his unnatural 
identification with its insubstantial existence. It is no privilege or widening of 
existence for the substance to be reduced to the serfdom of a shadow. 

The All-soul is never subject to any such obscuration. It is only the jiva soul, 
who is a detachable particle of the Potency of the All-soul, who is liable 
to succumb to His limiting Power. ‘The Conqueror’ had the spiritual vision 
of the Lord. The people of Nadia also saw the Lord but with their material 
eyes and necessarily as an entity of this world. But ‘the Conqueror’, no sooner 
did he see the Lord, then he believed Him to be more than human. In fact 
the Lord made Himself known to Him at the very first sight. No one 
can recognize the Lord unless He makes Himself known. This applies to 
all spiritual entities. They have an unstinted sight of one another in the Lord 
so long as they serve the Lord by the boundless measure of the 
perennial requirements of such service. The Lord strictly reserves the right 
of remaining unrecognized by all till He chooses to make Himself known to any 
one out of His own causeless mercy. 


As soon as the Lord permitted ‘the Conqueror of all quarters’ to have the real 



Sight of Himself all the learning of which he supposed himself to have been the 
master, came forward in the living form of the Spiritual Power that ever serves 
the Lord, and made Herself known to him as She really is. The goddess of 
learning is that Power whereby the Lord makes Himself known to the cognitive 
faculty of the jiva. She is part and parcel of the Divinity Himself. But she is not 
Herself the Master. She is Power and not Possessor of Power. She is, however, 
Power with Personality and Function under the Supreme and Exclusive 
Direction of the Divine Will. In this She resembles souls in the state of Grace, 
‘the Conqueror’ had been unable to know Her Real Nature as long as he had 
been trying to make use of Her for purposes other than the service of the Lord. 
But when the Lord was pleased to be merciful to ‘the Conqueror’ the goddess, 
by the Will of the Lord, instead of misleading now, made known to ‘the 
Conqueror’ the Real Nature of the Lord, which is, indeed, the legitimate function 
of all learning, ‘the Conqueror’, who had supposed that he was master of all the 
Shastric learning, now discovered that he had misunderstood everything. He 
also realized the fact that no one can know the Lord by one’s own 
aspiring efforts. 

The Goddess directed Her votary to make his unconditional submission to the 
Lord without delay. When the Lord asked him why he, ‘the Conqueror of all 
quarters’, had chosen to submit to Him, Keshab Bhatta replied that everything is 
fulfilled by serving the Lord. The spiritual service of the Lord, resting upon the 
principle of complete submission, is the summum bonum This is realized only by 
the causeless Mercy of the Lord as conditioned souls are naturally disinclined to 
unconditional submission to another’s personality. This was also the stumbling 
block in the way of the scholars of Nabadwip. They did not believe in the 
Personality of the Lord. But unless the Lord is a Person how is it possible to 
serve Him at all? The Lord, of course, is not a person like conditioned souls. The 
empiric idea of personality is that of a limited and erring mind joined to a gross 
physical body. It is not, therefore, at all surprising that there should be a sincere 
and universal repugnance, on the part of empiric thinkers, to admit 
such personality in the case of the Supreme Lord. But the Personality of the 
Lord and of His servants are neither material nor mental. Therefore the 
objection does not apply. 

The Goddess of Learning did not also direct ‘the Conqueror’ to submit to an 
abstract principle, which would be a fraud. The so-called submission to 
an abstract principle is rendered to a variable concoction of one’s own erring 
mind. When we pretend to submit to an abstract divinity ( ?) we thereby only 



make a show of submitting to our own pedantic fantasies. As a matter of fact we 
are disinclined to submit to a real person as such submission appears to us to 
be incompatible with a free rational individual existence. 

So submission to the Supreme Person is equivalent neither to submission to an 
abstraction nor to a conditioned soul. The Personality of the Supreme Lord 
is such that by submitting to Him we are delivered from the necessity of 
following the indeterminate abstract concoctions of our own sensuous minds and 
the similar fancies of others. We have in this world no choice but to submit to 
one of these two alternatives and we choose to call the process by the epithets 
of liberty (?) and rationalism (?) against the elementary principles of our 
own logic. Actual unconditional submission to the Transcendental Personality of 
the Supreme Lord is the only cure of this misfortune to which we are 
thus necessarily subject in the conditioned state. 

Keshab Bhatta admitted that the Personality of the Lord is inconceivable to the 
empiric reason and is the Truth of all the Scriptures Those empiric philosophical 
systems, which try to establish the Nature of Godhead by the process of 
inductive reasoning based on the experience of this world, can really arrive at no 
definite conclusion. Keshab Bhatta realized that he had known nothing by his so- 
called erudition, and that it was not possible for him to know the Truth except by 
the Mercy of the Lord. He also realized that he was now enabled to understand, 
against the conclusions of all empiric philosophy, that the Son of Sree Jagannath 
Misra is the Supreme Lord, that his own past profession of submission to the 
Supreme Lord had been a terrible self-deception, that it was only now that he 
was privileged to obtain the chance of really submitting to the Supreme Lord 
Himself in the Person of Sree Gaursundar, that such submission was at once the 
cause and the result, the indispensable concomitant, of spiritual enlightenment 
by the Grace of the Lord. 

The episode of the defeat and conversion of The Conqueror’ is the first-recorded 
instance of the deliverance of a conditioned soul by the mercy of Sree 
Gaursundar. We would, therefore, be well advised if we try to consider carefully 
how this Mercy was obtained. The process has been described above in detail by 
the grace of Thakur Brindavandas. We have seen that the Mercy of the Lord was 
not earned by any worldly merit. It was altogether causeless. We can, therefore, 
obtain some sort of the idea of its nature by the careful consideration of this 
actual instance. Does such knowledge help us in any way in attaining the 
spiritual life? It does so negatively, by destroying current misconceptions on the 



subject, if we give the Narrative an impartial hearing and thus prepare our minds 
for receiving the Truth when He actually makes His Appearance in the person of 
the devotee of the Supreme Lord, who teaches us the Truth by his own conduct. 
We can, however, understand the words of the bona fide devotee by the method 
of personal submission to him. Sree Gaursundar is the Supreme Lord Himself. 
He appeared in this world in the character of His devotee in order to establish the 
necessity of submission to the servant of the Lord if one really wants to obtain 
spiritual enlightenment. The episode of ‘the Conqueror of all quarters’ will have, 
therefore, served its real purpose if it establishes to one’s satisfaction the 
necessity of this procedure to be followed even by those who are supposed to be 
masters ( ?) of ah the knowledge of this world. 

But how is it possible to recognize the transcendental personality of the devotees 
of the Lord? This, of course, depends entirely on the Mercy of the Lord Himself, 
which can be secured by serving the Goddess of Learning not with the object of 
gaining any worldly advantage but for the purpose of receiving spiritual 
enlightenment. In the case of ‘the Conqueror’ he had all along been using his 
learning to procure reputation and wealth. He was now disillusioned by the 
causeless Mercy of Sree Gaursundar. The devotees of the Lord are ever engaged 
in endeavoring to reclaim ah conditioned souls from the state of bondage to the 
limiting Energy. The bondage is devised by the punitive Power of the Lord, who 
is the negative aspect of His Beneficent Power. The devotees of the Lord are the 
agents of Positive Beneficence of Divine Power, appearing in this world to 
deliver ah bound souls by affording them an opportunity of actual submission to 
the agents of the Lord, i.e., to themselves. The bound jiva is seldom inclined to- 
submit to any person other than himself. The inclination to submit to a devotee 
may be produced by attending carefully to the Narrative of the Activities of Sree 
Gaursundar as interpreted by His associates and followers for the benefit of ah 
conditioned souls. 

It was only after he had submitted to the Feet of the Lord that ‘the Conqueror’ 
attained the spiritual life. He became a devotee of the Lord. ‘The Conqueror 
of all quarters’ was freed from his accumulated ignorance and at last became 
really learned by learning the service of the Lord. 

Keshab Bhatta belonged originally to the school of Nimbarkacharya and is the 
author of ‘Kramadeepika in which work he lays down the principles of the 
service of Sree Radha Krishna in conformity with the Teachings of 
Sree Gaursundar and the verses of the ‘Dasa-SIoki of Nimbarkacharya. He 



was followed by Gangalya Bhatta and other disciples. At a subsequent 
period, Keshab Kashmiri, who is not to be confounded with Keshab Bhatta, 
and others gave up the path of Sree Gaursundar and established an 
independent school. But Sree Sanatana Goswami and Sree Gopala Bhatta 
Goswami, in recognition of the fact that Keshab Bhatta was enlightened by 
Sree Gaursundar, have collected material for the Vaishnavite canon from 
his work, the ‘Krama-deepika referred to above. 

As the result of the Mercy of Sree Gaursundar, Keshab Bhatta was enabled, by 
the operation of the Spiritual Power of the Divinity, to be 
simultaneously endowed with all excellences in the shape of devotion to the 
Lord, realization of the Divine Nature, and aversion to anything other than the 
Lord. Keshab 

Bhatta now became humbler than a blade of grass, discarding for good’ all the 
vanities of ‘the Conqueror of all quarters’. 

The followers of Sree Gaursundar adopt the conduct that is prescribed by the 
Scriptures for the truly enlightened viz., the genuine Brahmanas. They give up 
all military, economic, or other worldly ambitions, and, in fact, all hankering for 
fame and honour, accepting thereby in their hearts the ideal of the Tridandi 
Bhikshu. This conduct should not also be misunderstood. The achievements of 
this world also appear in their true .perspective to one only after he realizes his 
own spiritual nature. They cease to have any direct attraction for such a person 
who gets disentangled from the progress or decay of material civilization. He is 
freed from the influence of the hopes and fears of this world. But he is constantly 
engaged in serving the Lord by means of those very entities on the 
transcendental plane. The attitude is everything and is spiritual. The external 
conduct of the devotee is not properly intelligible to worldly people as it is not 
directed to any worldly object for any purpose that is intelligible to worldly 
people. The conduct of the devotee, however, is neither sentimental nor 
visionary, but part and parcel of the Eternal Reality Himself. 

Those, who imagine the pursuit of sensuous enjoyment to be the sole object of 
life, naturally regard the dedication of learning, health, wealth and 
other qualifications for the augmentation of such enjoyment as their legitimate 
and successful use. But the insignificance and ephemeral character of the 
result achieved is clearly demonstrated by the phenomenon of death. Death 
snatches its victim from the scene of his enjoyment and shifts him to an 



unknown and unknowable destination. As soon as one is enlightened in regard to 
the real nature of his self he is enabled to realize the triviality of his so-called 
happiness and possessions of this world. Such a person is privileged to 
understand the unwholesomeness of all worldly knowledge and activities as a 
help for such enjoyment. One is enabled to realize the self and his proper 
relationship with the ephemeral objects of this world by the Mercy of the 
Supreme Lord. On the appearance of self-knowledge one automatically 
understands the nature of the transcendental service of the Lord as being the only 
proper function of the soul. 

From this moment he is enabled to be constantly engaged in such service and to 
dedicate his learning, health and wealth and every other qualification to 
this purpose. 

It is not the duty of the soul either to be addicted to the things of this world or to 
renounce them altogether, as both courses lead nowhere. The duty of the soul is 
to try and find out the everlasting plane and to learn to function on that plane by 
giving up the fleeting prospects of the Epicurean and Stoic alike. Such course is 
the only one that exactly suits the requirements of the soul. The soul can be 
satisfied with nothing less than the immutable reality. 

The fact, which the soul in the state of bondage does not realize, is that the 
immutable reality is not to be found by the pursuit of fleeting 
worldly enjoyment, nor by simply abstaining from such pursuits. There is a 
third and the real method viz., that of service of Godhead. 

The nature of this service has to be learned from those who are themselves well- 
established on the spiritual plane. It can be learned by all persons who are 
sincerely desirous of knowing it and are prepared to give a really patient hearing 
to the exposition of methods and duties constituting the mode of endeavour for 
such enlightenment. This attitude is not possible in one who is not convinced of 
the unsatisfactory character of the correlated methods of enjoyment and 
renunciation of the things of this world, that are consciously or unconsciously 
followed by all conditioned souls including the pseudoreligionists. Only one 
who is thoroughly sincere will be disposed to accept the method that is laid 
down in the spiritual Scriptures and all that such a method necessarily implies. 

When the spiritual plane is actually attained one is in a position to realize for 
himself, in a clear and conscious manner, the true nature of the cosmic 



and super-cosmic processes and his own place and function in the whole scheme 
of the Universe. The realization of this should be possible in this life if one 
is prepared loyally to undergo the necessary training. It cannot of course 
be equally easy of attainment for all. There are very few persons who are 
fully prepared to accept the Truth on His Own terms. On those who are really 
so prepared the communication of the Truth acts with wonderful 
suddenness, because they really offer no resistance to His Entry into their hearts. 
But most of us are not really prepared to welcome the Truth even when we 
profess to cherish Him. This is the condition of the average honest person of this 
world. It is claimed in these pages that such persons are sure to benefit by 
listening patiently to the exposition of the Career of Sree Gaursundar from the 
lips of the real devotee. 

They will thereby gradually acquire the effective desire for living up to the 
Truth. No worldly merit or demerit can either help or retard the process 
of spiritual enlightenment. It is situated wholly beyond the range of every form 
of worldly conviction and is, indeed, likely to be more easily grasped by 
those who are less under the sway of their formed convictions. 

Those who have absolute faith in worldliness and perpetual ignorance are 
enamoured of the deeds of the heroes of this world. But we have also 
the testimony of all teachers of the Religion to the utter hollowness of all 
worldly achievements. A child may oppose the reconstruction of a house that 
is uninhabitable on the ground that the masons are plotting its destruction. But he 
is nevertheless necessarily wrong. Our worldly life requires to be 
thoroughly overhauled and reconstructed on a sounder basis. Those who are 
unduly attached to the rotten house by reason of either ignorance or malice, need 
not be regarded as wise. Empiricists are engaged in the attempt of trying to 
live safely and comfortably in the badly built falling house by opposing the 
process of imperative reconstruction. They do so partly for the avowed reason 
that it will be impossible to retain any measure of rottenness in the edifice after it 
has been thoroughly overhauled. They are right no doubt; but they are less alive 
to the consequences of their perversity. The policy is sure to bring the 
whole house down and crush them to death. There is absolutely no chance of 
their being able to live safely and comfortably in the rotten structure at any time. 

The deceptive triumphs of material civilization have failed to solve the old 
problem of the uncivilized times why everything of this world is fore-doomed to 
pass away. Those savages were not content with the conditions of their existence 



any more than we are with ours and also mainly for similar reasons. If an 
enchantress is pleased to provide us with an endless stock of the most beautiful 
things that make their appearance only to pass away, should we suppose that our 
requirement has been really fulfilled? It is no less necessary for us than it ever 
was for those savages to pause and consider well whether the achievements and 
convictions of material prosperity have any real value in the scale of our 
absolute requirements. The quest of the Truth is not for those who are content to 
remain ignorant by the lure of the dissipating enjoyment of the moment. 

The defect is not one of intellect, it extends to all the faculties which also have 
their due share in the performance of conscious activity. The self-imposed 
sway of empiric knowledge, which supplies no definite answer to our 
fundamental questionings, is responsible for all the misfortune of humanity. 
Empiric knowledge does not take man an inch towards the Truth. On the 
contrary it leads its votaries by an accelerated pace towards sin and death by 
its justification of the false ideal of a life of dissipation alternating with that 
of barren asceticism, the twin forms of egotistic worldliness. It ever whispers 
into the ears of man, that in this present depraved condition he seems also to like 
so much, that he need not depend on nor submit to any other authority than 
his own, that he is the master of his body and mind and through them of all 
things of this world which, he is assured, have been intended solely for 
ministering to his corrupt pleasures. These conflicting ideals of empiric 
knowledge require to be smashed as the first step in any plan for rescuing fallen 
humanity from the fell clutches of the Enchantress. . 

This was being done by Sree Gaursundar during the period of His Professor-life 
at Nabadwip and also in the subsequent period when He traveled for this 
sole purpose all over the country as a Sannyasin. Those who suppose that it 
is against principle of humility to oppose the untruth or neglect to vindicate 
the Truth, are the emissaries of the Deluding Power. The attitude of humility is 
to be practiced by all means because we cannot know the Truth by our 
own unaided effort. Empiric knowledge errs by ignoring this basic principle 
of spiritual conduct. By, submitting to empiric knowledge not humility 
but insolence in its undiluted form is practiced. Those, who are loyal servants 
of the Truth, are necessarily opposed to empiricism which is verily 
the embodiment of insolent denial of the supremacy of the Truth. Worldly 
people practice this masked insolence under the name of humility for 
deceiving themselves as well as their victims. But it should be easy to 
distinguish between true humility and the counterfeit ware. The uncompromising 



assertion of the principle of real humility is to be found in the resolve not to 
tolerate any of those countless insincere shifts devised by suicidal worldliness, 
under the connivance of empiric knowledge, for ruining humanity by masking 
them in the borrowed phraseology of Godliness. 

This was admitted by ‘the Conqueror of all quarters’. He was satisfied by being 
defeated in controversy by the Lord Himself. This extraordinary result would not 
have been produced if he had been worsted by an ordinary mortal. The process 
of controversy itself would have been a quite different one. ‘The Conqueror’ 
realized that his untruth had been confronted by Truth and was, therefore, utterly 
powerless to assert itself. He felt that he had been dabbling with words which 
might please and amuse but were really mere empty sounds signifying nothing. 
This utter hollowness of all so-called worldly knowledge is demonstrated to all 
sincere persons by Truth Himself in the form of the words of the devotees of 
Truth. On the lips of one who really serves the Absolute it is the Absolute Truth 
Himself Who makes His Appearance in the Form of the Divine Transcendental 
Sound. Divinity as Sound has Power to convey the knowledge of Himself to a 
soul who is prepared to receive Him as Sound against every specious obstructive 
argument. 

The arrogance of the devotee of the Lord is thus the perfection of true humility. 
Those who realize this are freed from the fetters of the Deluding 
Energy inasmuch as they are thereby proved to have no interest of their own as 
against the Truth. Those, who can be angry with the follower of Truth under 
any circumstance, are necessarily under the spell of empiric untruth which 
always differentiates the external conduct and the internal motives. But a votary 
of Truth is always necessarily above duplicity of this kind. This is realizable 
only by those who are themselves also wholly sincere. 

Impertinent fears for the future of the world never disturb the devotee of the 
Lord nor deflect him from the constant service of the Truth. This detachment 
should not be confounded with idleness or indifference to duty. The alertness and 
industry of the ‘worldling’ neither help nor retard the march of events of this 
world which is wholly controlled by a very much superior Power called in our 
shastras ‘Maya’ or the limiting Potency of Godhead acting in perfect obedience 
to the Will of the Supreme Lord. The empiricist, in his childish atheistical folly, 
chooses to imagine, against the clear impartial testimony of his own rational 
faculty, that he is the creator and controller of the forces of Nature. On the basis 
of this sacrilegious folly he builds up a science of conduct in keeping with this 



basic principle. It is the business of the devotee to strike at the very root of this 
folly in order to demolish the flimsy structure which has power to draw to itself 
so unaccountably the whole attention of most people of this world. There is 
no rational ground for doubting that a structure which is built on Truth is sure to 
prove a more suitable arrangement than one which is reared on untruth backed 
by insincerity. It is a fatal delusion, indeed, which has led rational beings to the 
strange conviction that they can manage to live well without Truth and that it is, 
therefore, their duty to oppose the Truth on the plea of possible ( ?) damage to 
the existing systems of untruth. 

The devotee is sent into this world by the Lord in order to establish spiritual 
conduct by demonstrating the unstability of the worldly life, its prospects 
and achievements. It is never possible nor rationally, desirable to try to build 
our lasting home in this world. They are mistaken who suppose that this life has 
to be lived for its own sake. Such people are sure to be surprised by death in 
the midst of their preparations for settling down in right earnest. This life is 
a preparation for the eternal life and should be lived accordingly. That conduct 
is fatal which in any way obstructs or delays the process of 
spiritual enlightenment. We should not allow ourselves to be diverted from the 
true purpose of this life by the temptations and disappointments provided by 
the Deluding Energy of the Lord, which are intended to help the process of 
our spiritual training if only they are rightly understood. 



Chapter 19 Thakur Haridas, before his meeting with Sree 
Gaursundar 

It will not be out of place at this stage to introduce the great personality who is 
the practising teacher (acharya) of the chanting of the Holy Name, the 
special Divine Dispensation for the Age of discord (Kali Yuga), the 
establishment of which is one of the Purposes of the Appearance of Sree 
Gaursundar in this world. Thakur Haridas is the eternal associate of the Supreme 
Lord and appears in the Company of the Lord whenever and wherever the Lord 
Himself chooses to make His Appearance. Thakur Haridas plays a different role 
in the different Avataras of the Lord. In this Avatara he is the acharya of the 
Holy Name. 

The Holy Name is both the Method and Object of worship of every pure soul. 

In the Kali Age nothing less than the Name Himself can effect the deliverance of 
fettered souls. This Teaching of Sree Gaursundar is exemplified by, the life 
of Thakur Haridas. In order, therefore, to be able to understand the method 
and object of worship that can alone be acceptable to a highly controversial Age 
like the present, which is least disposed to take anything on trust, it will 
be necessary to follow attentively the events of the life of the acharya. 

The fashionable theology at Nabadwip, which was the cultural center of Bengal 
at the time of the Appearance of the Lord, was frankly atheistical. 

The Philosophical School of the New Logic (Naba Nyaya) may be described as 
the attempt of our empiric reason to deny the necessity, as well as practicability 
of all worship. The jiva is himself discovered to be both worshipper 
and worshipped. Worship itself is supposed to be but a concoction of the jiva’s 
own erroneous speculations. The position to which one of the most 
highly developed system of the Philosophy of Logic led the people of Nabadwip, 
at the time of the Appearance of the Lord, and through them was accepted by 
people all over the country was exactly what w as specifically the worst fitted 
for understanding the uncompromising pure form of worship which it was the 
Will of the Lord to propagate by the life of Thakur Haridas. Whatever name 
might be borne by the different system of speculative philosophy they are in 
common agreement as regards the logical-necessity of atheism. Even the Gita 
and the Bhagavatam were taught at Nabadwip at this period as Scriptures of 
atheism. It gives us an idea of the audacity and range of activity of the New 



School of Logic of Nabadwip that it could devise interpretations even of the 
unambiguous texts of the Bhagavatam itself in favour of their theory of rankest 
atheism. It is only to be expected in these circumstances that the Scholarship and 
acumen of Bengal should be generously recognized in all parts of the country 
and abroad and even by the atheistical Vedantists of Benares, who have always 
claimed for themselves the theological leadership of philosophical atheism in 
India. 

Thakur Haridas made his appearance in the village of Budhan in the District of 
Jessore in East Bengal. This has made that part of the country since then a center 
of the worship of Godhead by means of the Kirtan. Thakur Haridas was born in 
a Muhammedan family. He comes into the light of our definite narrative under 
his changed name of Haridas, which means literally The servant of Hari’; Hari 
being the Name of Godhead in the Scriptures. So Haridas must have given up his 
family and society in some manner that is not definitely known to us, had been 
the recipient of the mercy of a Vaishnava and had already made extraordinary 
progress on the path of pure devotion, although he was in the first flush of youth 
when he is found living as a recluse in the forest of Benapole in his native 
District of Jessore. In the depth of the forest he resided in a solitary hut, 
worshipped the holy Tulasi, chanted, daily the Holy Name three lacs (3,00,000) 
of times night and day and ate food cooked in the homes of Brahmanas, which 
he obtained by begging. 

The Hindu Chief, who was in charge of the Local Administration of that part of 
the country, bore the name of Ramachandra Khan. He was one of the greatest 
of atheists and a hater of the servants of Vishnu (lit. the One All-pervading 
Lord). Haridas was treated with great reverence by the people. Ramachandra 
Khan found this intolerable. He could not rest till he had actually devised a plan 
for effecting the humiliation of Thakur Haridas. For this purpose he did 
not hesitate to stoop to be basest of devices. 

Ramachandra Khan, finding that Haridas was reputed to be absolutely free from 
all vices, hit upon a plan of creating in him the vice by exposing which he hoped 
to accomplish his ruin. He summoned to his help the most famous harlots and 
told them to destroy the chastity of Haridas who was under the vow of 
continence as an ascetic. One of the harlots, who was young and possessed great 
beauty, undertook to effect his ruin in course of three days. Ramachandra Khan 
pressed her to take an armed footman (paik) who was to catch him redhanded 
and bring both of them for punishment. But the harlot proposed that she should 



at first go by herself and after being with Haridas once take the paik to capture 
him on her second visit. 


That harlot, having put on her best attire, then presented herself at nightfall at the 
solitary cell of Thakur Haridas. After making her obeisance to the Tulasi 
she went up to the entrance of the cell and bowing to the Thakur remained 
there standing. She then sat down at the door-step, exposing her body to the view 
of Haridas, and made confession of her uncontrollable passion for him praying 
to be favoured by his intimate society. 

Thakur Haridas agreed to fulfill her wish after he had finished chanting the due 
number of the Name, bidding her in the meantime to wait and listen to 
the Sankirtana of the Name chanted by himself. The harlot on this 
assurance remained seated there as Haridas went on with his loud chant of the 
Holy Name til break of day. The harlot came away disappointed when it was 
morning, and informed Ramachandra Khan that Haridas had promised to enjoy 
her society and that the promise would be carried out when she met him next 
night. 

As the harlot presented herself before Thakur Haridas on the second evening he 
expressed his request that as on the previous occasion he could not keep 
his promise to her for the reason that he could not complete the chant of the 
due number of the Name, he would certainly fulfill her desire after the chanting 
of the due number of the Name had been completed, and he accordingly bade 
her wait there and listen to the chanting of the Name. The harlot made obeisance 
to the Tulasi and the Thakur and sat listening to the chanting of the Holy 
Name. But she naturally grew restive as the night was drawing to a close. The 
Thakur, noticing her impatience, told her that he had taken the vow of chanting a 
crore of the Name in course of the month. He had expected to finish the full 
number that night but could not do so although he had chanted ‘Him’ the whole 
night. The number would be certainly completed by the next night and then the 
vow would be fulfilled and he would be in the position to enjoy her company. 
The harlot reported accordingly to Ramachandra Khan. 

On the third evening the harlot duly made her appearance and, after making 
obeisance to the Tulasi and the Thakur, sat at the entrance of the cell listening to 
the chanting of the Holy Name, chanting the Same herself, till the close of that 
night. The mind of the harlot was changed by chanting the Holy Name all night 
in the company of Thakur Haridas. She now fell prostrate at the Feet of Thakur 



Haridas and confessed to him everything regarding the plot of Ramachandra 
Khan. She said she had committed endless sin as she was a harlot by trade. She 
begged the Thakur to save her, who was so vile, by his mercy. 

Haridas Thakur replied that he knew everything about the Khan and would have 
left the place three days ago. He had delayed his departure by three days on her 
account. The harlot then prayed that he might mercifully instruct her as to how 
she was to get rid of the miseries of the worldly life. Thakur Haridas then 
tendered her this advice. ‘Give away everything of your household to 
the Brahmanas. Come and stay here in this cell, chant constantly the Holy 
Name. Worship the Tulasi. You will then obtain the Feet of Krishna in no time 5 . 
After saying this and instructing her in the Holy Name the Thakur rose up and 
left the place, chanting the Name of Hari. 

Then that harlot on obtaining the command of the Guru gave away to the 
Brahmanas all the wealth that she had. With shaven head and a single piece 
of cloth for wrapping her body she lived in that cell and took the Holy Name 
three lakhs of times in course of every night and day. She worshipped the Tulasi, 
ate uncooked food by chewing, and often fasted. The senses were controlled 
and love of Godhead manifested itself. She became a famous devotee and a 
great spiritual teacher; and Vaishnavas of the highest order often came thither 
to have a sight of her. The people were astonished by this wonderful behaviour 
of the quondam harlot and bowed with reverence whenever they spoke of 
the greatness of Haridas. 

As the above theme is the subject of the highest importance to the present Age, I 
have tried to keep scrupulously to the words of Sree Kaviraj Goswami in 
describing this famous event of the life of Thakur Haridas. The chanting of 
the Holy Name of Krishna imparted by a pure devotee rescued a youthful 
harlot who had tried to seduce the saint at the instigation of a most profligate 
atheist. By this process the harlot was not merely rescued from a life of shame 
but became a devotee of the Lord fit to lift others to the plane of perfect purity. 

The chanting of the Holy Name can, therefore, reclaim the worst of sinners. 

The Holy Name has to be heard with reverence from the lips of a pure devotee. 
The Holy Name has to be received as a Sacrament from a pure devotee 
by complete submission at his feet. The Holy Name so received has to 
be constantly chanted by being free from all offense. The Tulasi has to 



be worshipped. All earthly possessions and all association with worldly 
people, especially in matters of food, clothing and residence, must be disowned. 
By this method, in a short time, the highest spiritual state is realizable. That 
state consists in serving exclusively the Feet of Krishna. This is the special 
Divine Dispensation for this Age of discord announced by the spiritual 
Scriptures and promulgated by the Supreme Lord, Sree Krishna-Chaitanya, 
through His eternal servant, Thakur Haridas. 

The obvious objection to the above, that is likely to suggest itself to those who 
are too much addicted to the concerns of this world, is that it does 
not sufficiently appeal to the rationalistic imagination. The scheme seems to be 
dry and sterile. It also appears to be both meaningless and impracticable. 

Every admittedly futile speculation, despite its futility, seems to be more worthy 
of the serious consideration of the worldling than any transcendental 
proposition. Appearances are decidedly against the acceptance of the teaching of 
Thakur Haridas by the average merely intellectual worldling. 

In the first place Thakur Haridas seems to ignore wholly the life that is ordinarily 
led by people all over the world. The new life, that is proposed, has apparently 
no point of contact with the life previously led by the disciple after election. This 
is not likely to appeal to those to whom the theory of materialistic evolution has 
become as it were the very breath of their nostrils. Ts a real gap or abrupt 
revolution possible in the world of life?’ ‘Can there be any such thing as the 
absence of proper purpose anywhere on the part of anybody in this fair world?’ 
Such and similar questions are bound to rush into the brain of all mental 
speculationists the moment they are asked to take the Holy Name of Krishna to 
the exclusion of every worldly function. The proposal seems to be so puerile and 
so queer and so utterly destructive of all that is near and dear to the heart of the 
average man! 

It is for this reason that the sadhus are on principle opposed to discuss spiritual 
subjects with persons who do not really seek the Truth. Those, who think that for 
them there is no driving necessity for such quest, are not likely to 
follow seriously any elucidation of propositions that have nothing to do with 
anything in which they feel really interested. The complete denial of any place to 
empiric conclusions, in the life that is proposed for the novice, is a staggering 
blow to most people who feel instinctively that they should refuse to listen to 
what obviously amounts to nothing short of an incitement to the commission 
of suicide. 



The spiritual purpose itself cannot, however, be explained away nor whittled 
down by means of clever interpretations. The actual doings and saying of Thakur 
Haridas stand in the way of those who try to do so. The Thakur literally acted as 
he taught. He acted also in accordance with the plainest meaning of his words. 

So there can be no ambiguity whatsoever. 

The harlot’s condition was not essentially different from that of any other 
worldling. The irrepressible desire for complete renunciation of the world, is the 
natural and inevitable result of the appearance of any real inclination for 
the spiritual life. The awakened worldly mind understands the necessity 
of committing mundane suicide in order to be reborn as the immaculate soul 
for the purpose of realizing the life eternal. The material mind is not a figment 
of the empiric imagination. It is a real envelope and has to be 
completely discarded. It will not do to imagine this enveloping darkness as 
possessing anything in common with the light. The material mind is like a sheet 
of impenetrable darkness that completely shuts out the light of the soul. The 
soul is by his nature self-refulgent and has nothing to do with the material 
mind which acts as a screen to cut off the light of the soul from the view of 
the observer who uses the mind for such purpose. This is fact and not a 
hypothesis like the so-called ‘truths’ and ‘facts’ conceived by the material mind 
in the vanity of its ignorance. The spiritual realization of the categorical 
difference, and relation of utter incompatibility between mind and soul is the 
first unique experience on the threshold of the awakened spiritual life. 

The harlot was not ‘converted’ by speculative arguments addressed to the mind 
but simply by listening to the Name of Hari from the lips of Thakur Haridas and 
chanting the Same herself in his company. She had apparently the advantage of 
possessing at the very outset a natural regard for Thakur Haridas and for his 
advice and also for the holy Tulasi. This was the only antecedent condition of 
her redemption. Was it, therefore, blind and traditional faith that actually saved 
her in this crisis? 

The answer must be in the negative. Those, who are most officiously given to 
the cult of blind faith, are not necessarily attracted towards the actual 
devotee. The affinity for the true soul is itself a spiritual, that is to say perfectly 
self conscious, impulse. It must be most carefully distinguished from the 
blind, material impulse which is so common and which, as a matter of fact, is 
the worst form of obstacle in the way of the realization of the spiritual life. 

The instinctive affinity of the harlot for Haridas is an activity of the soul and as 



such is, therefore, perfectly moral, perfectly self-cognizant and categorically 
different from sensuous sentimentality that ordinarily passes in this world as 
blind, faith. Faith is the instinctive attitude of the soul towards the Truth and can, 
therefore, never be blind. It is the blind who in their blindness confound true 
faith with the counterfeit ware with which alone they happen to be, unfortunately 
for themselves, only too familiar. 

Real faith can alone lead one to the presence of the pure soul. The material mind 
cannot reach the proximity of a Sadhu. The harlot possessed the spiritual faculty 
by which it was possible for her to really approach Thakur Haridas. The Shastras 
say that this true instinctive reverence for sadhus is the result of previous 
unconscious association with the pure devotees of the Lord. 

For the proper unconscious association with sadhu also sensuous sentimentality 
is often the chief hindrance. The sensuous sentimentalist seeks the 
gratification of his own senses. He, therefore, is least disposed to serve the sadhu 
on the account of the latter. It is going against his grain. The sadhus accordingly 
keep away from philanthropists as these are not willing to learn to get rid of 
their sentimentality. A pseudo-devotee, who parades his false sentimentality, 
readily enough obtains the cheap reverence of all worldly persons as his due, 
by misunderstanding of the purpose of the Scriptures. Such a person is not 
likely to bow to the sadhu, as he really wants to be served himself. Plain 
worldly people are likely to be more easily benefited by the process of 
unconscious association with the sadhus. Those who bring with them any 
previously formed notions regarding the nature of the sadhus, find it difficult to 
get rid of those false sentiments which stand in the way of their associating on a 
proper footing with the real sadhus. The only natural way of associating with the 
devotees of Godhead consists in doing whatever the sadhu wants one to do and 
in the way that he advises, without expecting any desirable or undesirable result 
to oneself therefrom. The harlot possessed something like this natural faith in 
sadhus by reason of her previous unconscious association with the devotees of 
Godhead. 

The immoral life, that was being actually led by the harlot did not stand in the 
way of her redemption. The point is made absolutely clear by the fact that 
she went to Thakur Haridas for the purpose of seducing him. This shows also 
that her instinctive faith in sadhus was not colored by any conventional 
moral sentiments. This was an advantage. Too rigid empiric morality 
obstructs spiritual awakening more effectively than even confirmed immorality. 



This is due to want of humility and spirit of submission to the sadhu that is sure 
to be engendered more or less by the dogmatic professor of conventional 
morality. True morality is never possible prior to spiritual awakening. That 
which passes as morality in the society of worldlings, is only a hypocritical, and, 
therefore, more dangerous form of immorality The moral instinct proper, which 
belongs to the soul, must not be confounded with this hypocritical immorality 
and its conventions. The harlot was not hampered by the conventions of a 
hypocritical morality. She possessed an open mind with a natural liking for the 
society of really pure souls, although she herself was actually leading a life that 
is condemned by moralists. But as it is not possible for a person to be really 
and fully moral before he realizes the nature of his true self, the case of the 
harlot, instead of being worse, was in certain respects better than that of 
the conventional moralist who is rigidly committed to the casuistical defence of 
the unspiritual life that he actually leads. 

It is not, of course, intended to undervalue the principle of morality in anyway. 
That instinct, in its pure form, as in the case of ever other instinct, belongs to the 
soul. The form, in which it passes current in the world, is only the perverted 
reflection of the real principle and is not conducive to spiritual life. 

Its apparent advantages are strictly confined to this perverted existence. 

Whatever tends to reconcile us to the worldly life, stands self condemned for that 
very reason. Empiric morality is fully open to this charge of pandering, to the 
unspiritual life. As a matter of fact neither conventional morality 
nor conventional immorality are praised by the sadhus, as, by themselves, 
they stand without any relation to the Truth. As soon as our conduct gets related 
to the Truth it assumes its natural state which has nothing to do with either 
the conventional moral or immoral principle of this world. To call the 
spiritual conduct as merely moral in the ordinary conventional sense of the 
world, would, therefore, be wholly misleading. The spiritual conduct is no 
doubt perfectly wholesome, being free from all affinity with the unwholesome 
things of this world. The so-called ‘moral’ conduct based on worldly experience 
owes all its value to its worldly utility. This fact categorically differentiates 
spiritual ‘purity’ from worldly morality. There is, of course, no possibility of 
immoral conduct on the spiritual plane. In the absence of all possibility of 
immorality there is no scope for worldly morality in the realm of the Absolute. 
The Kingdom of Godhead accommodates all varieties of conduct by endowing 
all of them with perfect wholesomeness. Can such conduct be appropriately 
called ‘moral’ in the conventional sense of the term? 



For instance the trade of the harlot is in this world generally held to be utterly 
immoral. Is it possible for the ‘ethical” mind to conceive of a state of 
existence that is infinitely higher than any conceivable worldly moral excellence 
? 

Those fanatics who, grossly misunderstanding the nature of the subject treated 
by the spiritual Scriptures, set up as orthodox and uncompromising ‘believers’ in 
the ‘letter’ of the Scriptural texts and try to ‘reform’ the ‘abuses’ of this world by 
immoral regulations that are profanely attributed to Godhead Himself on 
the strength of such silly and mischievous interpretation, deserve to be put into 
the pound in the company of those ‘innocent’ creatures that are mercifully 
denied the quality of voicing their ‘notions’ for harming everybody. There 
are hypocritical pedants who, affect to hold up their nose at the very sound of 
the name of a harlot and forthwith prescribe penitential punishment of the 
most atrocious kind for reforming their morals in ‘obedience’ to the injunctions 
of the Holy Scriptures. The Devil is also permitted to quote the Scriptures for 
his purposes. 

Fanatics and hypocrites were in possession of the stage of the tragic drama of 
worldly life at the time when Thakur Haridas emerged on the bewildered 
vision of those pseudo-religionists and began to supply by his actual conduct the 
real explanation of the only purpose of all the Scriptures, by electing the harlot 
as the fittest and the very first object of the Divine Grace. He was 
naturally opposed by the renegade Brahmana Ramachandra Khan who, in order 
to exploit the letter of the Scriptures for the accomplishment of his villainy, gave 
it out as his ‘duty’ to put down by all means a Muhammedan who had 
the temerity to set up as the expounder of the Shastras of the Hindus! 

This brings us to the principle of hereditary caste. The teaching of the Shastras 
belongs exclusively to the twice-born. The Shastras themselves lay 
down elaborate rules by which to constitute the community of the Brahmanas 
who are to be the only teachers of them. This last part of the system had 
been allowed to pass out of the memory of the people, and, in its place, had 
been substituted by gradual and insidious steps and by general connivance, 
the principle of heredity. The hereditary Brahmanas by the strict Shastric test are 
no Brahmanas at all. Ramachandra Khan was the champion of this corrupt 
system, not for any real regard born of sincere conviction for the merits of the 
system itself or from any knowledge of the Shastras, but, as it always happens in 
such cases, from malice and insolence. 



If Haridas Thakur would practice the function strictly reserved for hereditary 
Brahmanas then the whole system of caste based upon the principle of 
heredity is challenged at its source. If a Muhammedan can become a Brahmana, 
the present social system of the Hindus, which is claimed to be part and parcel 
of the Religion, is utterly demolished. This was bound to agitate profoundly 
all caste-Hindus. 

Nor was this all. The chanting of the Holy Name of Krishna was also practiced 
with a loud voice. This was an entirely novel mode of worship to the Hindus 
of that time. The new out-caste apostle of the eternal religion, in opposition to 
all current rituals and forms of worship, was declaring to admiring Hindus 
an apparently new form of worship as the one enjoined by the Shastras 

Could all the contemporaneous Hindus be so utterly mistaken that they required 
to be imparted ah initio the knowledge of the fundamentals of their own religion 
by a Muhammedan, against the teaching of all the hereditary Brahmanas, the 
exclusive teachers of the same by the rules of the Shastras themselves? 

It is quite easy to imagine the intense consternation and hostility that were 
naturally aroused in an Age of casuistical fanaticism by the preaching of 
the simple doctrines of the Religion of the Truth. The chanting of the Holy 
Name of Godhead is the only sacrament of the true religion prescribed for the 
present Age. This simplification is in keeping with the spirit of all the other 
sacraments authorized by the Shastras. The other sacraments are not suitable for 
this Age which is too much addicted to skeptical argumentation ad nauseam. As 
soon as one realizes the true nature of the soul all his activities are thence 
forward naturally and necessarily performed on the spiritual plane. The 
narrow ceremonial view of the sacrament is due to the imperfect spiritual vision 
of the observer. The sacrament may, therefore, differ in the different Ages in 
its external appearance, which, is however, the only view that is open to the 
notice for whose special benefit it is ordained. 

The chanting of the Holy Name is liable to the least objection even as sacrament, 
from a casuistical Age. The Mercy of Godhead must be sought willingly, nay 
with the keenest hankering that is born of positive liking, for obtaining real touch 
with him in order to serve Him by means of the spiritual senses of the pure soul. 


The sacrament implies a real mutual personal relationship between the Lord and 
His servant. It is definite, concrete and loving, but in the spiritual (not abstract, 



notional or concocted i.e., purely mental) sense. The personality, senses and 
functions of the soul are not comprehensible to, nor admissible by the mind. The 
mental refusal to recognize the substantive existence of the soul, is the greatest 
curse of this Age of dogmatic empiricism. This piece of dogmatism must be got 
rid of. 

The empiric reason is confronted to a fight at its own weapons when it is 
summoned to admit the rationale of the worship of Godhead by means of 
His Name only. The Name of Godhead must not also be supposed to connote 
or denote anything of this world, in no shape, neither as precept nor concept. 
This should, in all conscience, more than satisfy the passion for abstraction of 
even the Moslem iconoclast. 

The next point is that the Name of Godhead must be admitted as true and not as 
a mere concoction of the material mind. The Scriptural Name of Godhead is not 
a thing of this world. The Scriptural Name is Himself Divine. The 
Scriptural Name requires to be served with the tongue by an attitude of 
humble supplication for manifesting His Divine Nature to the pure serving, 
essence of our soul. Even the most rabid iconoclast need have no cause of 
complaint against such service. It is this pure service that was practiced by 
Thakur Haridas, which, he maintained, was the only sacrament enjoined by 
the Scriptures as suitable for this Age of wrangling sophistry (Kali Yuga.) 

The implications of this position will be more fully developed in course of 
this Narrative at the proper stages. 

As the service of Godhead is the eternal function of the individual soul in the 
state of grace, it transcends all mental and physical activities. The 
Shastras accordingly reserve the service of Godhead to those who are twice- 
born. The terms Brahmana (one who has knowledge of Godhead as the Great) 
and Dwija (twice-born) applied to persons who are eligible for the service of 
Godhead, refer to the individual soul in the state of grace and not to caste. If 
Thakur Haridas be regarded as a Moslem born, it is then the physical body that 
is denoted by the Name Thakur Haridas. If Ramachandra Khan claimed to be 
a Brahmana on the strength of his seminal birth in a Brahmana( ?) family, he 
also supposed his physical body to be Brahmana. The objection of 
Ramachandra Khan to Thakur Haridas, on the strength of such foolish 
interpretation of the Shastras, was met by Thakur Haridas by pity and 
indifference. Ramachandra Khan did not possess the good fortune of the harlot, 
whom he made the dupe of his deviltries, to be enabled to listen to the Holy 



Name of Godhead from the lips of Thakur Haridas. A Brahmana, who claims to 
be such by right of seminal birth, is less fit for spiritual service than even an 
open minded harlot. 

From Fulia Thakur Haridas moved off to Chandpur. The village of Chandpur 
was situated in the present District of Hughly in the neighbourhood of 
Tribeni (Saptagram-Tribeni). Balaram and Jadunandan Acharyas, the purohits 
(family-priests) of Hiranya and Gobardhan Mazumdars of Tribeni, had their 
residence in the village of Chandpur which lay to the east of Tribeni. The 
word ‘Mazumdar’ is the equivalent of ‘Majumadar,’ the title of an accountant of 
the royal revenues under the Nawabs. Balaram Acharya was the disciple of 
Thakur Haridas and regarded himself as his servant. Haridas stayed with 
Balaram acharya in the later’s house. Balaram Acharya with great care 
made arrangements for the residence of the Thakur in the village. Haridas lived 
there in a hut and accepted the alms of food at the house of Balaram Acharya. 
The boy Raghunath Das son of Gobardhan, was at this time studying under 
Balaram Acharya. Raghunath used to go to Thakur Haridas for a sight of the 
saint. Haridas was merciful to the boy. Thakur Haridas’s mercy was the cause of 
the subsequent attainment of spiritual enlightenment by Raghunath Das. 

The following event occurred while Thakur Haridas was staying at Chandpur. 

One day Balaram Acharya, by his humble supplications, induced Thakur Haridas 
to repair to a gathering at the house of the Mazumdars. The two brothers stood 
up on seeing the Thakur and, falling at his feet, offered him a seat with great 
respect. There was present in the assembly a very large number of Pandits, 
Brahmanas, and other worthy people. The two brothers Hiranya and Gobardhana 
were also very learned persons. All present spoke highly in praise of Thakur 
Haridas. This met with the hearty approval of the brothers. It was known to all 
that the Thakur recited the Holy Name three lakhs of times daily. The Pandits 
accordingly talked about the greatness of the Name as Thakur Haridas assumed 
his seat in their midst. 

Some of the Pandits said that the cure of all sinfulness automatically results from 
uttering the Name of Godhead. Others expressed the view that the individual 
soul (jiva) is freed from the miseries of this life by uttering the Name. Haridas 
declared that those two were not proper fruits of the chanting of the Name. Love 
to the Feet of Krishna is aroused by taking of the Name. 


Haridas said that the condition of a person who realizes such love is described in 



a sloka of the Bhagavatam (Bhagavatam 2-35). ‘A person, who is habituated to 
serve Krishna in the ways enunciated above (viz., hearing, chanting, etc., loses 
all control over his mind and, by reason of realizing the quality of love 
by chanting the Name of Krishna, experiences an anxious restlessness of the 
heart. He loses all consideration for the opinion of the people and laughs, 
cries, shouts, sings and dances at intervals. Salvation and destruction of 
sinfulness are only attendant results— ‘Just as the rising of the Sun dispels all 
darkness, so also no sooner does the Name of Hari manifests Himself than He 
forthwith destroys all the sins of the person who utters His Name/ 

Haridas requested the Pandits present to explain the above A loka. All the Pandits 
desired Thakur Haridas to elucidate its meaning to them. Haridas who had 
recited the Lloka now said that even before the Sun actually begins to appear 
darkness is dispelled by his approaching light and the fear from thieves, ghosts 
and demons is also destroyed; and, on his actual appearance, all useful activities 
begin to be performed. In like manner sins and other evils are destroyed by the 
reflected light of the approaching Sunrise of the full manifestation of the Name; 
while, on the actual appearance of the Name, love to the Feet of Krishna is 
aroused. Salvation is a trivial result which is effected by the dim reflection cast 
by the Name as His Appearance draws nigh. The devotee does not wish to 
accept salvation which is at first offered by Krishna. Haridas quoted the two 
following Llokas of the Bhagavatam in support of his contention (Bhagavatam 
2-42; 5-19-12). ‘If the dying Ajamil could attain to the realm of the Vaikuntha by 
calling upon Hari, which happened to be the name of his son, who can estimate 
the effect if the Name is chanted with faith?, ‘My own,’ says Krishna, ‘Never 
accept the different forms of salvation, e.g., attainment of My realm, attainment 
of power and wealth and fame similar to Mine, the privileges of dwelling near 
Me, even the favour of becoming one with Myself; all of which privileges I offer 
them unreservedly. They covet nothing except My service/ 

Gopal Chakravarti was a Brahmana who belonged to the household of the 
Mazumdars, being employed to carry letters and money to the king. He had to go 
up to Gauda and appear before the Padishah himself in connection with 
the discharge of his official duties. He used to convey twelve lakhs of 
mpees annually to the king. He was, in his early youth, very handsome and a 
very good scholar. Gopal lost his patience on hearing that salvation can be 
obtained by the dim reflection of the Name. He then spoke in great anger. 


“Pandits who are in assembly here,” said Gopal, “All of you have heard the 



conclusion announced by one whose trade is to amuse people by dance and song. 
Emancipation, which is unattainable by means of knowledge of the Brahman in 
crores of births, is held by him to follow automatically the manifestation of the 
dimmest reflection of the Name.” 

At this point Haridas entreated Gopal not to entertain any doubt on the subject, 
as the Shastras themselves declare that liberation from the bondage of the 
world results at once from the appearance of the dim reflection of the Name. The 
bliss of liberation is utterly trivial in comparison with the happiness of loving 
service. It is for this reason that the devotees do not accept liberation The Thakur 
then quoted the sloka of Hari Bhaktisudhodaya (H. Bh. S. 14-31). Teacher of 
the universe, to me, immersed in the pure ocean of bliss by meeting Thee, the 
bliss of the attainment of the knowledge of the Brahman (the Great Nourisher) 
appears to be as contemptible as the tiny speck of water filling a whole in the 
ground indented by the hoof of cattle.’ 

The Brahmana now became furious. He shouted out that he would assuredly cut 
off his nose if liberation does not result from the dim reflection of the Name. On 
hearing the blasphemy the members of the assembly gave vent to their sorrow at 
the behaviour of Gopal. Mazumdar reproved him severely. Balaram Acharya 
expressed his indignation by remarking that the offender was a fool fit only for 
hair-splitting sophistry and was perfectly ignorant of the principle of devotion. 
How could he go the length of insulting even Thakur Haridas! He was doomed 
to perdition beyond all help. 

Haridas rose to leave the place as he heard the words of the Brahmana. 
Mazumdar forthwith severed all his official connection with Gopal and with 
all the assembled persons fell prostrate at the feet of Thakur Haridas. 

Haridas smiled and spoke sweet words. He said, “ None of them had done 
anything offensive except that Brahmana The Brahmana was also not to blame. 
His addiction to controversial discussion was the cause of his strange 
behaviour. The greatness of the Name is not realizable by futile discussion. How 
could he, therefore, understand those principles?” He then bade them depart to 
their homes in peace, expressing the wish that no one might come to grief by 
his connection with himself. 

Hiranya das came back to his house after receiving this assurance of pardon and 

forbade Gopal to cross his threshold. In course of three days the 

offending Brahmana was attacked with virulent leprosy. His very prominent nose 



rapidly melted away. The fingers of his hands and feet, rivaling the champaka 
buds in their delicacy, all shriveled up and dissolved away by the corrosive force 
of the malady. On beholding this all the people were filled with great wonder. 
They praised Haridas and made obeisance to Him with reverence. 

Sri Krishna Kaviraj Goswami concludes the above account with the pregnant 
observation that although Haridas did not feel offended by the conduct of 
the Brahmana yet did Godhead award the offender the punishment due to 
his transgression. It is the nature of the devotee of Godhead that he ever 
pardons the faults of the ignorant. It is Krishna’s Nature that He cannot bear 
any calumniation of His devotees even through ignorance. 

Haridas was grieved at heart on hearing of the misery of the Brahmana, He 
apprised Balaram Acharya of his intention to leave the place and proceed 
to Shantipur. 

The account is prefaced by Krishnadas Kaviraj Goswami with the remark that 
the event narrated is most wonderful for the reason that it contains the 
clear elucidation, from the lips of the Acharya himself, of the Divine 
Dispensation of the present Age. The reader must not forget the point, which is 
the center of interest of the whole narrative detailed in this work, viz., that 
Thakur Haridas is the Acharya or the practicing teacher, authorized by Godhead 
to promulgate the congregational chanting (Sankirtana) of the Holy Name, 
which is the mode of worship that alone can demolish the worst form of atheism 
in the name of ‘free' thinking that is unfortunately so prevalent now-a-days all 
over the world and which is the terrible but inevitable natural consequence of the 
exclusive worship of Mammon by all the resources of mind and body. 

The world is gratuitously assumed by a pseudo-rationalism to be the only reality 
and the attempt is, therefore, made to ascertain the methods by following which 
we can attain the gratification of the senses which function appears to be the 
relationship naturally subsisting between ourselves (?) and the world. The senses 
are assumed to be an integral and undetachable part of ourselves. The mind is 
identified with the senses on the one hand and the soul on the other. The senses 
connect the mind, or the soul, by this assumption, with the external world. The 
senses are the eyes of the whole system. All pain and pleasure suffered by the 
mind are due to the way in which the mind directs the senses in their-relations 
with the world. The mind cannot apparently know by intuition, at any rate 
ordinarily, all the consequences of any particular mode of employment of the 



senses. The mind can, indeed, try to guess about them. 


But it can never be quite sure about any occurrence till after actual experience. 
This uncertainty is supposed to be reducible to certainty if it could be possible to 
know from experience the uniform ‘laws’ that are assumed to govern 
all phenomenal occurrences under all circumstances. This hypothesis of 
the uniform operation of the ‘laws’ of Nature has been built up by the 
accumulated ‘experiences’ of the race. But as the occurrences themselves present 
an infinity of complications it has not been possible to attain to anything like 
certainty in isolating the single threads of the web in order to be certain of our 
hypothesis in every case by being enabled to reproduce an the occurrences of 
nature in the Laboratory. 

Assuming that the above object of scientific endeavour will be realizable in 
practice in the long run, its success should make it possible for us to prolong the 
possibility and scope, of sensuous enjoyment ad infinitum. If we fail to 
be perfectly ‘happy’ by the complete elimination of ‘pain’ by the 
proper employment of the ‘forces’ of Nature in the way that is calculated to 
produce such a result under the then known ‘laws of Nature,’ our labours should 
still have really no abiding value for ourselves. But has our ‘experience’ up to 
the present moment taken us an inch towards the realization of unmixed or 
lasting pleasure? Is ‘pleasure’ really different from 'pain,? Or is it only different 
by circumstance? That which is food for the goose is food for the gander, is 
not found to be more true than most hypotheses. Variation, which is sought to 
be eliminated, is found on close inspection and analysis to be the 
indispensable condition of the pleasures itself. We are, therefore, left inevitably 
to the present condition of necessary and complete ignorance in order to have 
any ‘pleasure’ at all by our dealings with the world by means of our senses. 

It is argued that pleasure and pain might themselves be enriched, deepened and 
broadened by more experience and that it is worth our while to help this process 
in a conscious manner. To this the answer would be that the better and more 
detailed realization of our utter ignorance, in the midst of the mockery of a 
civilization that is claimed to be based upon knowledge, would be a 
self contradiction that is not likely to appeal to the assorting instinct of our 
rational nature and is calculated to make our condition no better than it is. 
Civilized wickedness and filth are not preferable to any nuisance of the 
uncivilized state. Satan, who may be allowed to possess the perfection of 
worldly culture, is probably more miserable than the uncivilized Gond. It would 



be difficult for the unbiased reason of man to choose between materialistic 
savagery and materialistic civilization. 

‘Ignorance is misery/ says one of the wisest of proverbs. Increase of ignorance is 
not any decrease of misery. Ignorance is supposed to be the state of all 
empiric knowledge which is improperly assumed to be alone available to man. 
Our very nature is sometimes supposed to be incapable of real enlightenment. 
This axiom of pessimism is exploited for advising man to turn a deaf ear to 
the Teacher of the Absolute. It is even more disastrously utilized for 
condemning the devotees themselves. 

It cannot be otherwise. The soul is in this case identified with the mind-cum- 
body. Abandonment of the mind, therefore, appears as equivalent to the 
abandonment of the soul, or to self immolation. The mind seems to be our 
all. Groping in perpetual ignorance appears as our inevitable function 
miscalled ‘Search for the Truth/ Empiric enthusiasts imaginatively describe this 
process as the ‘eternal quest’. These metaphors and denunciations do not, 
however, help us in anyway; but, on the contrary, they only tend to obstruct the 
process of the real quest. 

Gopal Chakravarti is a typical Brahmana of the pseudo Vedantic School of 
Sankara. He has no doubts regarding the goal of the Vedanta. According to 
him the attainment of the Knowledge ( ?) of the Brahman, Who possesses 
no distinctive function at all that is capable of being defined, is the goal. By 
the attainment of the knowledge of the real Nature of the Brahman, the 
individual soul is freed from all the miseries of his apparent existence which 
only seems to be limited and is, therefore, only supposed to be miserable. As 
there is only One Entity, viz., the Brahman, Who is ever ( ?) free from all defects 
and all merits, the goal can be no other than complete absorption (?) into the 
One. On the attainment of this desirable goal there is no difference between the 
devotee, devotion and the Object of devotion. The service ( ?) of the Brahman is 
thus only a temporary means to a final end, which means being different from 
the end and is, therefore, necessarily terminable with the attainment of the goal. 

It is the highest form, of religion to try to realize, by the appropriate methods, 
the knowledge of, and absorption into, the undifferentiated Brahman. When 
the individual soul becomes one with the Brahman the state of separate 
existence and necessity for any kind of distinguishable function terminate 
together. According to Gopal Chakravarti and his associates this knowledge of 
the Brahman is higher than service and the termination of both ( ?) knowledge 



and service is the highest goal. Gopal is quite sure that this is the only teaching 
of the Scriptures. It may be observed at this place that Sankara does not 
discard the principle of worship, but declares its tentative necessity which is 
terminable on self-realization which, according to him, is identical with 
complete absorption into the One. 

Thakur Haridas distinguishes between devotion, work and knowledge. The soul 
in the bound state desires one of two alternative functions. If he is optimistic 
he wants greater scope for enjoyment. If he happens to be pessimistic he 
hankers for emancipation from the misery of mundane existence. 

The latter, viz. , the pessimist, sometimes thinks that real emancipation is 
impossible so long as the consciousness of one’s being different or separate from 
the One, persists. It is to this extreme school of atheistic Vedantists, advocating 
unification with the Brahman, that Gopal Chakravarti, like most cultured people 
of his day as well as of this, happened to belong by his empiric predisposition. 
According to this school fmitive work leads to empiric knowledge and the latter 
to the third position of inexpressible oneness with the Brahman. Devotion or 
service is classed under fruitive work, which is assigned a lower position than 
empiric knowledge. The process of advance to the goal of complete unification 
with the One, according to this school, is devotion (blind faith rendering possible 
utilitarian work of a low order) (Bhakti?) leading to work of a higher order 
(Karma), which, in its turn, leads up to empiric knowledge of the uselessness of 
all knowledge and all activity terminating in perfect absorption into the one 
(Brahm-laya) . 

Haridas is neither a pessimist nor an optimist. He is an absolutist. He is 
convinced that the theory of complete absorption into the One is 
logically unsound and opposed to the real teaching of the Scriptures. The 
alternatives of enjoyment and abstention from enjoyment exhaust indeed, the 
possibilities of function of the mind and body; but they have no application to 
the soul which is located beyond the reach of body and mind. The soul is 
substantially different from the mind and body. The soul is the substantive reality 
while the mind is only his perverted reflection in the mirror of limited existence. 
The mind is the material shadow so to say of the soul who is the spiritual 
substance. The mind is a material phenomenon galvanized into the appearance of 
selfconsciousness by the impulse communicated to it by the deluded soul. Mind 
is the shadow of the perverse soul mirrored in matter. This description is, and 
can be, but an imperfect and misleading analogy of the relationship that 



actually subsists between mind and soul. The shadow of the material substance 
is not categorically different from the substance itself, both of them being 
material phenomena. The shadow of the soul in this case is, however, 
categorically different from the soul, being a material phenomenon pure and 
simple. The soul in his spiritual or natural conditional is categorically different 
from material phenomenon. The soul is self-consciousness itself. There can be 
no such thing as ignorance in the soul. There can be no such thing as genuine 
selfconsciousness in the mind which is non-soul. The apparent self- 
consciousness of the mind is really a state of complete ignorance which is given 
its shape and colour by the qualities of matter, viz., grossness, limitation, 
perishability, changeableness, etc. These unwholesome traits are non-existent 
and impossible in the soul. The soul is capable of forgetting his real nature 
mistaking himself to be a material entity. The soul is not above one possible 
weakness, viz., willful rebellion against the Truth. It is a real blunder on the part 
of the soul to choose to be a rebel. But the soul is perfectly free to refuse to serve 
the Truth, i.e., Godhead. He thereby proves deliberately false to his own 
substantive nature, because it is the constituent function of the soul, in his 
natural state of perfect spiritual existence, to be the exclusive servant of the 
Truth. The soul who rebels against Godhead is punished by his exile to the 
phenomenal world and by incarceration in the double material case of mind and 
body. The point will be further elucidated later. 

Fruitive work and empiric knowledge are functions of the mind and, therefore, 
purely material phenomena. By means of such work and knowledge the deluded 
soul cannot realize his natural function for the plain reason that they are not his 
proper function at all. By means of work and knowledge the Soul only moves in 
a vicious circle of material existence which is seemingly conscious but really 
one of absolute ignorance. This is the explanation why by means of the 
undifferentiated knowledge of the Brahman freedom from the fetters of work 
and knowledge of this anomalous existence can be attained by crores of years of 
endeavour. This is what Gopal says. The delay is, however, not due to the 
complexity of the process, as he supposes it to be. So long as a person continues 
to suppose that an impersonal all-pervasive Entity is the goal of knowledge one 
is not yet freed from the real ignorance of his spiritual function. This must be so 
because Truth is not impersonal. 

Neither is Truth a person in the sense in which the mentalists, including Sankara, 
apparently want us to understand the term. Spiritual personality is categorically 
different from the distorted empiric notion of the same. Until the nature of the 



personality of the Truth is properly grasped one continues in the deluded state 
which is also the state of limitation (bondage). Therefore Gopal Chakravarti is 
right, although he is unaware of it, in holding that the chance of emancipation of 
a person who has attained to the notion of Godhead as an impersonal and 
inactive, although all pervasive and transcendental, Entity, is very slight. Gopal 
does not understand that his ideal person is also necessarily no less deluded than 
himself if he supposes his condition to be the goal. 

The interpretation of the text relied upon by Gopal Chakravarti, said Thakur 
Haridas, is that of a person who does not understand the Nature of the Name by 
reason of his having no access to Him. The deluded person is no 
longer consciously contradicting himself and is not, therefore, insincere in the 
sense of being double tongued. He is certainly to be pitied. Neither can his 
conduct be regarded as sincere inasmuch as it is opposed to his real nature of 
which he only happens to be ignorant by his own conscious perversity. The 
empiric casuist who affects to believe in the impersonal nature of the Truth is 
only pushing his conscious perversity of the choice of untruth to its 
logical conclusion. If the deliberate error is not ignored his conduct cannot 
be regarded as consistent being altogether untrue. 

Gopal Chakravarti’s source of error lay deeper than the plane on which he stood 
and was, therefore, naturally incomprehensible to him in his condition 
of cultured perversity. The Vaishnavas, who alone understand the real cause of 
the worldly ailment, alone possess the true spirit of toleration. Thakur 
Haridas showed his toleration of the rank atheism of deluded Gopal Chakravarti 
by abstaining from disturbing him further. This toleration really means 
the withdrawal of his causeless apparently aggressive mercy from a deluded 
soul whose opposition to Godhead is likely to be increased by the process. It is 
the greatest possible misfortune that can befall a conditioned soul to miss 
the special mercy of the Vaishnava by his successful opposition to the Truth. 

The apparent intolerance of a Vaishnava is as helpful to a person as his tolerance 
of evil. The Vaishnava never co-operates with the offending soul in his 
sinful activities. He does not agree to be false to himself and his eternal Master 
to please the confirmed apostate. Such sympathetic toleration of evil is a 
grave offense against the Truth notwithstanding the significant fact that it alone 
is relished by the pantheistic school of the pseudo-Vedantists. 

The point reached marks almost the limit of rational discussion towards the 
spiritual issue, that is open to the empiricist. He cannot proceed further without 



discarding the method of empiricism by giving up completely the process of his 
unaided effort. It was not possible for Gopal Chakravarti to retrace his steps by 
any other, method. That he was not at all prepared for this is proved by his 
offensive conduct towards Thakur Haridas who had, therefore, no other 
alternative but to leave him to the mercies of Maya. But the actual goodwill of 
Haridas towards the offender bore its fruit in the swift punishment, that could be 
intelligible to the sufferer himself, that smote him in the form of leprosy. Gopal 
was, thereby, afforded an excellent opportunity of revising his impersonal 
doctrine. But he was of course free to avail of it or not. 

The Godless attitude is an attitude of absolute confidence in one’s own judgment 
and power. The atheist is not at all disposed to submit to another in any 
circumstances. He has to be compelled to submit to non-God because he can 
consistently submit only to compelling force. Such submission alone 
is appreciated in the state of sin and ignorance which is a radically false 
position and necessarily entails constant irrational conduct on a really rational 
being unnaturally disposed to accept the same through the no less unnatural fear 
of punishment. The Holy Name of Godhead is not a thing of this world. 

The Name of Godhead is identical with Godhead Himself. The Godhead appears 
in this world in the Form of the Name on the lips of His pure devotees. 

He appears as the transcendental Sound on the spiritual lips of the soul in the 
state of grace. 

The Name of Godhead appearing on the lips of a pure devotee as the 
Transcendental Sound, is perceptible as such only to the spiritual ear. 

These statements are likely to appear absurd and puerile to the 

dogmatic impersonalist. Can the soul, he will persist to ask, have lips and ears ? 

Can the soul have senses ? But can the empiricist know, even if he has? 

The transcendentalists maintain that the soul has an infinity of senses of which 
the physical senses, are a perverted reflection. There cannot even be the 
shadow of existence of the physical senses if there were no substantive spiritual 
senses. But there are also the spiritual senses themselves as distinct from but 
not unrelated to their corresponding shadowy reflections in this 
phenomenal world. This is involved in the very definition of the Absolute. The 
spiritual sense is categorically different from the physical sense. The spiritual 
senses are perfect and self-conscious, there being no interval or barrier of time 
or space between the sense and its possessor. The spiritual body is indivisible 
and perfectly self-conscious in every part and is identical with the owner of 



the body. All this is incomprehensible to us although it is perfectly 
consistency with the fundamental principles of indivisible substantive existence, 
that are also acceptable to the empiricist. The empiricist, although he may 
sometimes under pressure of his own logic, seem to agree with the conclusions 
of transcendentalism, finds it impossible to adopt them in practice. The 
absolute conduct is not possible on the mundane plane to which he finds himself 
strictly confined by his own postulates backed by the real Deluding Potency. 

If one is merely disposed to regard any sound as transcendental, such wish alone 
will not make the sound of his choice to become really transcendental. Similarly 
if a person is disposed to regard a transcendental Sound as an occurrence of the 
mundane atmosphere such attitude will not also affect the subjective nature of 
the transcendental Sound. There is real difference between the transcendental 
Sound and mundane sound. The transcendental Sound is identical with the object 
denoted by the sound. The mundane sound is separated from the object denoted 
by it by the intervals of time and space. To hear the mundane sound of the name 
of a Lion is not the same thing as to see the beast. On the spiritual plane the very 
word ‘Lion’ is identical with the animal. The animal is fully realizable by and in 
the hearing of his name. Whereas the real nature of the mundane animal, denoted 
by the mundane sound, ever remains a thing unknown. 

The Name of Krishna is identical with Godhead. But the Name of Krishna does 
not manifest Himself on mundane lips nor to the mundane ear. The 
Name Krishna appears in His Form of the Transcendental Sound on the spiritual 
lips of His devotees and is heard by the spiritual ear of the submissive soul by 
the Grace of Krishna. The Name Krishna is identical with the Possessor of 
the Name. The Name Krishna appears to the listening ear, as He is, only by 
degrees. As soon as the dormant soul catches the first faint reflection of His 
Light he is at once completely free from the bondage of ignorance and sin. It is 
the Name Who comes of His Own accord to our fettered soul. The bound jiva. 
has no access to the Presence of Krishna on his own initiative. Krishna’s 
Approach is heralded by the harbinger of Light whose first glimmerings on their 
appearance put an end to all misconception regarding the categorical difference 
between light and darkness. 

Unless and until the soul becomes aware of the true nature of spiritual existence 
by being so enlightened by the Source of all consciousness, he is sure to mistake 
the mind for his real self and the mental function as the only knowledge. If at 
this stage he does not willfully shut his eyes but keeps them turned towards the 



growing Light he gradually and in due course obtains the sight of the concrete 
Source of all light. This is the mode of Appearance of the Holy Name. The sight 
of Krishna is alone capable of inspiring love for Krishna. This is the position of 
Thakur Haridas as explained by himself to the Pandits who were in assembly at 
the house of the Mazumdars. 

Thakur Haridas mercifully explains that the different concrete forms of the so- 
called ‘liberation’ concocted by the mentalists as their unknowable summum- 
bonum are the outcome of the desire for sensuous gratification. If one could live 
in the happy realms of Krishna described in the Scriptures, the 
empiricist supposes that such a person should be enabled to enjoy more good 
things than are available on the Earth if his condition is really worth having. The 
same desire for extended opportunities of sensuous enjoyment happens also to 
be the real motive behind the formulation of the other ‘forms’ of the 
empiricist’s ‘saved’ existence. The grossness of the ideal of liberation is fully 
unmasked when one is told that the Salvationist’s ‘final’ form is to become the 
equal of Godhead by merging with the Object of his worship? 

It is to this unnatural and profane position that the unchecked speculations of the 
mentalists are logically bound to lead in the long run. Thakur Haridas ascribes 
the grossness of the ideal to the attitude of the empiric thinker, viz. the insatiable 
desire for sensuous pleasure. 

The desire to enjoy is categorically different from, and wholly incompatible 
with, the desire to serve, to love. If one feels a real desire to serve Krishna 
he would lose all taste for his own enjoyment. All impurity, unwholesomeness 
and misery are fortunately and mercifully ordained by the Lord as the 
inevitable consequence of the insatiable desire for selfish enjoyment. But the 
soul who turns away from immediate enjoyment by considerations of greater 
prospective enjoyment in the sequel, cannot also for that very reason realize the 
condition of loving devotion to the Feet of the Lord, however strongly impressed 
he may profess to be of the desirability of such a state. He is, no doubt, free to 
think that he really desires it; but at the same time he is wholly incapable of 
ever attaining to it by such desire. But, says Thakur Haridas, he may 
nevertheless attain to love for Krishna by the Chanting of the Holy Name, by the 
Grace of the Holy Name Himself. This is the special Dispensation for the Age 
which is so irremediably speculative; and there is no other way open to the Age 
of attaining to the loving service of Krishna. 



Haridas refers to the texts of the Scriptures to prove the truth of his statements. 
This is the only proper use of the Shastras. The Shastras bear witness to 
the Truth of the realizations of all really pure souls. 

There is one other fact which is worthy of our notice. The Pandits of the learned 
assembly, headed by Hiranya Mazumdar the master of the house, took the side of 
Thakur Haridas. They not only strongly censured the conduct of Gopal 
Chakravarti in the open assembly but Hiranya Mazumdar thought it his duty to 
renounce all further connection with a Brahmana who could be guilty of an act 
of discourtesy to the devotee of Godhead. Nevertheless the Pandits and 
Mazumdar himself felt themselves involved in the sin of Gopal Chakravarti by 
the unhappy circumstance of their having had to hear most reluctantly 
the blasphemous words uttered by Gopal in their presence. For this sin the 
only expiation, prescribed by the Shastras, was to seek in all humility the pardon 
of Thakur Haridas, not for the offender but for themselves. This is not 
mere courtesy but an unavoidable necessity if one really wants to serve the 
Truth. Any association, deliberate or accidental, with untruth tends to obscure 
our vision of the Truth, Who is, indeed, a very Jealous Master. Those who 
are disposed to serve the Truth with causeless, loving devotion, throw to the 
winds all considerations of ignorant propriety or ignorant justice and are 
never satisfied by serving the Truth by all their senses at all time and in 
all circumstances. By the grace of Thakur Haridas this instinct of loving 
devotion actually manifested itself in the conduct of those who had listened with 
faith to the Absolute Truth from his pure lips. 

Sree Raghunath das Goswami was a child at this time. He used to visit the 
Thakur in his hut during his stay at Chandpur. The boy was the 
fortunate recipient of the mercy of Thakur Haridas. This is considered by 
Shree Krishnadas Kaviraj Goswami as the real cause of Raghunath Das’s 
subsequent unique devotion to the Feet of Sree Chaitanya. The mercy of a sadhu 
acts equally on all persons, irrespective of age, sex or condition, all of whom 
have an equal chance of being benefited by associating with a real sadhu. 

The interests of the soul are not capable of being adversely affected by any 
worldly conditions. The boy’s soul has no defect of immaturity any more than 
that of an old man the advantage of maturity. Such maturity or immaturity has 
no relevancy in one’s associating with a sadhu. The boy’s soul, eventually with 
the Soul of the old man, may or may not be disposed to listen to the words of 
a Sadhu for the genuine purpose of acting up to the same. It is as necessary for 
a child to associate with a sadhu acts for an adult; but in neither case one can 



be sure of obtaining the mercy of the sadhu. with whom he may choose- 
to associate. The sadhu is kind to one who is really inclined to serve Godhead. It 
is the function of a sadhu to foster one’s inclination for the service of the Lord 
by means of his conduct and words. The articulated sound is, however, the 
sadhu’s unambiguous weapon to fight all ungodliness. It should puzzle the 
muddled brain of the whole race of self-conceited empiricists to understand why 
and how the sadhu need have no other work except talking about almost 
anything to whom he likes. Any person, who is spoken to by a sadhu even for 
the tiny space of a second, has every chance of attaining the real object of life 
which is unattainable by infinite endeavour by any other method. Nay, it is our 
duty to listen to a real sadhu, if we are fortunate enough to meet him, in 
preference to all other duties which are not only of secondary importance but a 
positive obstruction on the path of the highest and only good. 



Chapter 20 Thakur Haridas before his meeting with Sree 
Gaursundar (Contd.) 

From Chandpur, Thakur Haridas came to the village of Fulia on the Ganges near 
Santipur, the home of Sree Advaita Acharyya. Haridas was thereby enabled to 
associate with Acharyya Gosain who roared with delight on gaining 
the company of Haridas. Haridas, remarks Thakur Brindavandas, floated on 
the ocean of the mellow quality (rasa) of Govinda (Cowherd Krishna) by 
obtaining the society of Advaita. 

The last sentence mentions an important truth. The philanthropic sensualists 
(prakrita sahajiyas) affect to believe that Thakur Haridas had no access to the 
Amorous Pastimes of Sree Krishna, being exclusively devoted to the chanting of 
the Name, this shows ignorance of the real Nature of the Holy Name as well as 
of the transcendental amour. It is repeatedly declared by the Shastras that the 
Name of Krishna is identical with His Form, Quality, Activity and Servitorship. 
The Bhagavatam (11-2-40) bears out the statement of Sree Rupa (Bh. R. Sindhu 
P. L.: 3-11) that liking for the chanting of the Name is the conclusive sign of the 
first appearance of spiritual amour. Those, who are addicted to sensuous 
pleasures, have no liking for the Name of Godhead. Those pseudo-ascetics, who 
do not chant the Name of Krishna, are really indifferent to the service of 
Godhead. Thakur Haridas could possess such an overpowering inclination for 
chanting the Name of Krishna by reason of his real love for the Lord and 
consequent real detachment from the pleasures of the world. Thakur Haridas, 
who was acquainted with the mellow quality of the Name of Krishna, is the 
greatest of teachers as he is alone authorized to admit one to the meaning of the 
Shastras treating of spiritual amour. The mellow quality of amorous love for 
Krishna is realized as the effect of the chanting of the Name of Krishna by the 
method that is free from offense against the Name. The philanthropists are 
effectively shut out from all access to the experience of the real nature of the 
spiritual quality of amorous love by their offensive taking of the Name of 
Krishna. By reason of their excessive addiction to sensuous enjoyment, which is 
aggravated by chanting the Name without trying simultaneously to avoid 
committing such offense, the philanthropists fall into the most heinous blunder 
of supposing that the spiritual amour is identical with gross sensuality. The only 
way of getting rid of the lust of the flesh is by chanting the Name of Krishna by 
avoiding the ten offenses against the Name. 



These particulars should enable the unbiased reader to realize the nature as well 
as the cause of the misunderstanding that is commonly entertained by both 
liberationists and elevationists in regard to the efficacy of the chanting of the 
Holy Name. Those who believe in the superiority of fruitive work and empiric 
knowledge, or, in other words, the average men of the world, find it impossible 
to sympathize with those philanthropists who teach by their preaching and 
practice that the taking of the Name Krishna, without really giving up or 
endeavoring to give up the life of worldliness, is the highest and only duty of all 
persons. The philanthropists have forfeited the sympathies of all honest well- 
wishers by leading a dissipated life of idleness and debauchery which is bound 
to result from taking the Name without abstaining from the commission of 
offenses against the Name. The philanthropists are opposed to those restrictive 
injunctions of the Scriptures that endeavor to put down immorality and 
worldliness. They find it convenient to suppose that it is possible to approach the 
Presence Divine with a heart deliberately bent upon sinfulness. They are profane 
enough, as the result of such habitual commission of offenses, under the guise of 
piety, against the Name, to dare attribute even carnal desires to Sree Krishna and 
His eternal Consorts against the gravest and clearest warnings of Sree Rupa 
Goswami who is admitted by all as the Divinely authorized exponent of the 
nature of spiritual amour. We shall return again and again to this all-important 
subject as the narrative develops. 

The life that was led by Thakur Haridas while he was living in the cave at Fulia, 
is described as follows by Krishnadas Kaviraj Goswami and it forms the 
authoritative refutation of the practices and arguments of the philanthropists. 
Haridas kept constantly walking along the bank of the Ganges chanting aloud the 
Name 'Krishna’. Haridas surpassed all ascetics in his aversion to the pleasures of 
the world. All praise to his holy mouth which was ever full of the Name of 
Krishna. He did not experience a moment’s disinclination to the Name of 
Govinda. His appearance underwent a constant and novel transformation under 
the influence of the mellow quality of devotion. Sometimes he danced all by 
himself. Sometimes he made a sound like that of a maddened lion. There were 
times when he cried in grief with a loud voice. Sometimes he would indulge in a 
mighty laughter that was haughty and deliberate. At times he shouted forth 
ejaculations of sorrow with a deep voice. Sometimes he would lie prostrate in a 
swoon. He would sometimes shout forth, in the hearing of the people, sounds 
that belonged to another world and would then explain the same in the most 
excellent manner. Shedding of tears, horripilation, laughter, swooning, sweating 
—the spiritual perturbations that are expressive of devotion to Krishna— 



manifested themselves all together in his holy form the moment Thakur Haridas 
entered the dance. The flow of the stream of joy was such as to drench all limbs. 
Even the worst of atheists (pashandas) experienced a great pleasure on 
beholding the same and the wonder of the series of the beauteous horripilation of 
which the sight is coveted even by Brahma and Siva. All the Brahmana residents 
of Fulia witnessed with rapture those holy manifestations. A deep faith took 
possession of the minds of all those people. In this manner Thakur Haridas lived 
on at Fulia. After bathing in the Ganges he rambled all over the place, chanting 
with a loud voice the Name of Hari. 

The activities of the devotees of Godhead are perfectly incomprehensible to the 
material mind of man for the simple reason that they do not target anything 
of this world. The mind cannot understand super mundane activities. It 
supposes that it has a right to be able to understand every occurrence that comes 
within the range of its perception. Thakur Haridas appeared to the people of that 
time as a man living among men. He appeared to them to possess a physical 
body and senses. He was being fed in the ordinary way everyday at 
Advaita acharyya’s. He used his senses apparently in the same way as any other 
man. He might have probably been supposed to be a good man and as 
comparatively indifferent to the comforts of the body. But he did not as a matter 
of fact also really neglect anything that is absolutely necessary for the 
maintenance of life. There was nothing super-mundane about all this. Would it 
be proper to regard such a person on such testimony as a supernatural being? 
Even if we choose to consider him as supernatural on such evidence would we 
not be led from one mistake to another by such untenable concession to 
superstition? Would it not be a still greater folly to try to follow the life and 
conduct of such a person and ask others to do the same under such a notion? Is it 
feasible to follow with a, clear conscience a person of whose conduct the true 
meaning is not at all possible for us to understand? 

It would be both possible and useful to accept the mode of life of another person 
if by doing so our own existing interests and convictions would have a prospect 
of being demonstrably improved instead of being wholly suppressed. 

If all persons began all of a sudden to chant the Name of Hari night and day and 
to depend on others for the supply of food which is necessary for them for being 
able to perform the said function, would not such course tantamount to an idle 
and suicidal folly? 



The life of the devotee should have no value if it is not capable of helping us to 
perform our ordinary duties in a better way. The life must not only be practicable 
in itself but a distinctive and intelligible improvement on the one that it is to be 
allowed to replace. The life of Thakur Haridas as depicted above seemed to 
satisfy neither of these essential conditions. 

As a matter of fact we shall see subsequently that Sree Chaitanya was regarded 
as an unbalanced sentimentalist by even the leading Vedantist Scholar 
of Benares, the recognized head-quarters of Shastric culture of that day and 
this. Persons who devote their intellect to the study of the Shastras in a 
systematic way, need not thereby be rendered devoid of ordinary common sense. 
The absence of common sense is the usual charge that is brought by 
utilitarian thinkers against such scholasticism. The empiricists accept without 
reservation physical Nature, as it appears to their senses, as the Reality in its 
immediately available form to be understood for the purpose of deducing 
conduct that is proper for us to adopt in regard to the world. If the knowledge 
that is acquired has an evident likelihood of making ourselves unsuccessful in 
the struggle for physical existence the utilitarian have no patience for such 
knowledge. 

The error of Vedantism, or rather of its interpretation by Sree Sankaracharyya, 
from the point of view of the utilitarians, consists in this that it does not really 
provide for the needs of the life that one and all are under the necessity of 
actually leading in this world as the basis of all possible activities. It may not be 
possible for the utilitarians to refute the position of Sankara by means of 
metaphysical arguments. But it is their contention that the theoretical strength of 
Sankara’s position is no refutation of its practical weakness. A Sankarite cannot 
himself be in love with the life that he recommends others to live. This is too 
grave a defect to be overlooked. It is even necessary to oppose Sankara in the 
interest of everybody including his followers. One must be forced to live, and 
live efficiently, against every other consideration to the contrary. The arguments 
of Sankara consequent,” are appreciated by the 

utilitarians but only as a speculative theory of existence that was never intended 
to be acted upon in practice. Are we required to have a similar attitude 
towards Thakur Haridas also? Are we to suppose that what is perfectly proper 
and natural for Thakur Haridas is perfectly improper and unnatural for every 
other person? The path of devotion followed by Thakur Haridas is, however, 
not merely a beautiful conception of the human brain to be admired from 



a distance but which cannot and must not be followed in practice. 

Thakur Haridas actually led the life which he tells us is not only practicable but 
whose full acceptance is the only thing needful for its own sake. 

Love for Krishna is the one thing needful. Amorous love is the highest form of 
such love. The realized practice of love for Godhead is the only natural 
function of the free soul. It is possible for all souls to attain to it. Whoever 
possesses this spiritual love towards Krishna must be offered, as being a most 
loyal servant of the Lord, our unconditional homage. It is, however, not possible 
for the mind of man in the fallen state to understand the real nature of spiritual 
activities. This is the point of departure of the teaching of Thakur Haridas from 
that of Sankara, or rather from the current interpretation of the system of 
Sankara. 

It is, says Thakur Haridas, practicable for a person in the state of sin to attain to 
the spiritual plane by the Grace of the Holy Name of Krishna, but he Grace 
of the Name can be gained only by serving the Name in the proper manner. It is 
at once easy and difficult to understand how the Name is to be served. The 
Name is Krishna Himself. He Appears on the tongue of His devotee in the form 
of the Transcendental Sound. Listening to the Holy Name from the lips of a 
sadhu is the way in which He is to be served. The Name does not Appear on the 
tongue of a person who is not a sadhu. A sadhu benefits all by his chanting of 
the Name. One must be a sadhu in order to be able to serve Krishna by chanting 
the Name for the benefit of all. 

The only way in which it is possible for a sinful man to become a sadhu is by 
serving the Name by his ear. The Name Appears in the form of 
the Transcendental Sound on the tongue of His devotee. This sound is 
identical with Godhead, the only object of our worship. The mode of worship of 
the Name consists in listening to the Transcendental Sound by means of the 
spiritual ear, because the fleshy ear cannot hear the transcendental sound. 

The spiritual ear belongs to the soul, but in the case of the conditioned soul it is 
in the dormant state. Its function is then delegated to the material ear. But 
the soul should like to resume his own function if he likes and he is also likely 
to like to do so when he understands that it is necessary in his own interest to 
do so. In the state of willful transgression the soul is forgetful of himself and 
his natural function. The sadhu (i.e., the pure soul in his natural state) 
possesses the power, delegated to him for the purpose by Krishna Himself, of 



making the transcendental sound be heard by the forgetful soul. As soon as the 
fettered soul hears the transcendental sound the function of his spiritual ear is 
reawakened and the enlightened soul is then fit to serve the Name by his 
opened spiritual ear by the method of submissive spiritual hearing. 

It is, therefore, necessary to submit to hear the Holy Name from the lips of the 
sadhu on his own conditions. Till this duty is properly performed we can have no 
access to the plane of the activities of the real devotee. Sankara is silent about all 
these details which really matter. His so-called followers are as a rule opposed to 
all spiritual activity. It is our function to introduce the reader to the nature of the 
spiritual activities of the soul in course of this narrative. Our Hero is Sree 
Gaursundar, the Supreme Lord Himself. He is at once the only Source and the 
only Object of all worship. We have seen that the Divine Master and Lover 
appears in Gaursundar in the role of His Own Servant and Mistress to teach us 
how to love Him by making the experience available to us by Himself tasting the 
Love for Himself. 

But up to the point of His career that has yet been reached, the Lord has not set 
up openly as teacher of the Religion. Sree Gaursundar, to the eyes of 
His contemporaries of this world, was as yet no more than a dutiful and 
learned Brahmana householder, assiduous in the performance of all those duties 
that ordinarily fall to the lot of a God-fearing Brahmana. There was as yet 
nothing unusual or extraordinary about Him. Had His career terminated at this 
point He might have been regarded as having confirmed by His conduct the 
mode of life led by the Brahmana householders of Nabadwip of that period. We 
now know that this was by no means His purpose. But His real purpose had not 
yet been divulged to anyone. That purpose was not understood, even when it 
was subsequently fully divulged, by most of His contemporaries. 

The reason of such misunderstanding is plain. Sree Gaursundar’s Life can be 
understood only if we submit to be spiritually enlightened. Thakur Haridas is the 
teacher, authorized by Sree Gaursundar Himself, from whom we have to learn 
how in this Iron Age we are to receive spiritual enlightenment. The purpose of 
Sree Gaursundar is not to teach personally the method that is to be followed in 
this Age, by those souls who are in the state of bondage, for attaining the 
spiritual life. That function is not directly exercised by Sree Gaursundar or Sree 
Krishna. It is the function of Nityananda, but not even his main or direct 
function. Nityananda or Baladeva is the second Self of Sree Krishna (or 
Gaursundar) and they represent the Supreme Lord in His aspect of the possessor 



of all-majesty, all-power and all-grandeur. Baladeva is the Source of all service 
of the Divinity in the outer hemisphere of the transcendental world. It is the 
indirect function of one of Baladeva’s secondary selves to direct the service of 
the Lord in this lower, phenomenal world. This particular secondary self is sty¬ 
led Maha Vishnu in the Scriptures. 

But even Maha Vishnu does not come in direct contact with the material mind or 
anything mundane. That function is delegated to Vishnu who is a secondary self 
of Maha Vishnu. Vishnu Himself also is located outside this mundane world. All 
the secondary selves of the Supreme Lord, issuing ultimately from Sree 
Baladeva or Nityananda, are absolutely spiritual in all their Divine activities. 

The connection between the two planes, viz., the spiritual and material, is 
established by Siva whose nature is most difficult to understand. It is a 
mixed one being both Divine and non-Divine. Brahma, the first progenitor of all 
the creatures of this phenomenal world, is associated with Siva in carrying out 
the will of Vishnu, who is the direct Divine Master of this phenomenal world. 

It is the object of both Siva and Brahma, who are the servants of Vishnu, as their 
highest function to divert the minds of fettered souls to the service of Vishnu. 
Brahma appears in the transcendental Pastimes of Sree Gaursundar in the form 
of Thakur Haridas who is delegated the function of promulgating 
the Dispensation of the Age, viz., the chanting of the Name of Krishna. 

This function which belongs ultimately to Sree Gaursundar, is exercised directly 
and fully by Thakur Haridas as his authorized function. 

The function thus Divinely Delegated to Thakur Haridas is by no means an 
unimportant one. It is, on the other hand, the one thing needful not only for souls 
in the state of bondage but for all souls. It is the only function of all souls who of 
course vary in their degree of its realization. There is no higher function than 
love for Krishna. Thakur Haridas teaches how the conditioned soul may attain to 
the love of Krishna in this Age of sophistry by chanting without offense the Holy 
Name of Krishna. The life of Thakur Haridas presents us with the career of a 
pure soul who practices the chant of the Holy Name of Krishna without offense. 
The life of Thakur Haridas at Fulia, described by Thakur Brindavandas in a few 
pregnant words, is for this reason one of the most important parts of the present 
Narrative in as much as it introduces the reader, if it is rightly understood, to the 
true meaning of the other parts. 



It will be our endeavor to establish, by the grace of Thakur Haridas, the truth of 
the proposition that the method of chanting the Holy Name of Krishna, in 
the manner that is free from offense, is the only perfect service of the Lord 
having the unique quality of being both the means and the object of all 
spiritual endeavor. As means the Name is accessible to the worst of atheists 
especially to that stubborn species that belongs to the present Age who are 
fortified against the spiritual function by all manner of sophistries. Access to the 
Name is closed to none who are prepared to recognize the name of Krishna as 
identical with Krishna Himself and not as a mere passing sound of the mundane 
atmosphere ; and that the Name does not, therefore, manifest Himself on the 
material tongue of the physical body which cannot serve the Divinity. The Name 
can be served when He manifests Himself on the spiritual tongue as the 
Transcendental Divine Sound. The spiritual service is possible only on the 
Appearance of the Name, in the Form of the Sound, on one’s tongue. The Name 
first Appears to the listening ear of a person who submits to receive Him as He 
Appears on the lips of a sadhu. 

The Name of Krishna appearing on the tongue of a sadhu as transcendental 
sound is not a figment of the imagination. He is the only reality, being 
the absolute person Himself. If the Name is served by the method of 
perfect submission under the direction (of a sadhu, by such service love for 
Krishna is obtained. By no other method one may be enabled to realize the love 
for Krishna. It is for this reason that the Name is the Highest and Only Means. It 
is quite in keeping with the conclusions of our unbiased reason that Krishna 
in His Own Form can also be the only Means of His highest service. 

But against this if it be urged that as the Form, Quality, Activity and Servitorship 
of Krishna are also identical with Krishna how may the Name be regarded as the 
only means? This is true. But to the soul who happens to be under the thralldom 
of matter the Name alone is accessible. The Form, Quality, Activity and 
Servitorship, are attainable in the order of enumeration by the method of taking 
the Name without offense. This is not against reason because the Holy Name 
alone is least liable of being wholly misunderstood by the fettered soul who 
submits to receive Him from the lips of a sadhu for the purpose of serving Him 
in the manner that is free from offense. 

It is for this reason that the question as to what constitutes the act of offense 
against the Name, becomes all-important. The philanthropists who confound the 
soul with the material mind necessarily imagine that the Name and the sadhus 



are also phenomena of this world and, therefore, they are as a matter of course 
comprehensible by the material mind. This attitude of virtual refusal to recognize 
the Divine Nature of the Holy Name makes the recital of the Name of Krishna 
by the philanthropists a meaningless mundane process which bears only an 
external resemblance to the service of the Holy Name by the devotee. The 
difference is of course not perceptible to the material mind but it is, and must be, 
necessarily self-evident to the pure soul who has access to the Substantive 
Reality. 

It is also for this reason that philanthropists, who profess to be Vaishnavas, 
suppose that everyone has a right ab initio of realizing the Form, Quality and 
Activity of Krishna and his own distinctive relationship to Him as His servitor. 
On this supposition they engage in gross and sensual idolatry under 
the persuasion that it is identical with the religion enjoined by the Shastras 
and sanctioned by the actual practice of the most eminent devotees. From this 
error, if it has already taken a deep root, it is very difficult to extricate the 
offending soul. All the gross immoralities that are practiced in the name of 
religion in different parts of the world by certain classes of people, who are very 
anxious to keep their activities screened from the view of those who do not 
belong to their secret brotherhoods, are due to their neglect to chant the Holy 
Name of Krishna, heard from the lips of a real sadhu in the manner that is free 
from offense and under the direction of sadhus. 

The chanting of the Transcendental Name is the only admissible form of religion 
to fettered souls as He is not capable of being grossly misrepresented. It is of 
course also possible to chant the Name of Krishna in the offensive manner. But 
once we are put on our guard against the deliberate commission of such offense 
we would naturally be unwilling to honour a person as a real sadhu unless he 
fully satisfied, at any rate to our judgment enlightened by the chanting of the 
Name, this crucial test of sainthood. The offense against the Name is nothing 
short of willful misapprehension. We must not understand that the Name or 
hearing or chanting of the Name is a material phenomenon. We must insist on 
being fully satisfied that it is not really a material process that is being offered to 
us by any person wearing the external garb of a sadhu. We must always refer to 
the texts of the Scriptures which uphold the spiritual view in the most 
uncompromising manner. Thus fortified it should be possible for a sincere soul 
to detect every form of mischievous attempts of the cheats and hypocrites. 


A person has to thank only himself for being a victim to pseudo-sadhus. A 



person is similarly to blame only himself if he fails to find the real sadhu, 
or neglects to seek for him. When once a person attains the condition that 
entitles him to sing the Name of Krishna in the manner that is free from offense, 
he finds that all his wants have been automatically fulfilled. For example he 
is freed from all anxiety on his own personal account. He realizes that he is 
not any limited entity and that he is located beyond the jurisdiction of birth, 
death and wants. He obtains the vision which is capable of distinguishing 
between the real and the apparent. But as those, who either belong to a lower 
level of the spiritual plane or do not belong to the spiritual plane at all, have not 
his perfect vision, they naturally fail to understand the true bearing of his 
activities. 

The activities of Thakur Haridas can be properly understood only by perfectly 
self-realized souls. All that we may affirm in reward to them at this place, is 
that they show an utter forgetfulness of his material surroundings and an 
overpowering attachment to the Holy Name of Krishna. We have already seen 
that he was absolutely free from sexual weakness and was thoroughly versed in 
the principles of the Shastras. The idea regarding the real nature of his 
personality will be further elucidated by a careful consideration of the different 
aspects of the event that we are just going to describe. 

The Kazi or Moslem priest under the employ of the State, who was both priest 
and judge and looked after the Moslem religion, soon began to take an interest in 
the doings of Thakur Haridas. Being apprised of his antecedents and 
present behavior he considered it necessary to bring the matter to the notice of 
the local Governor. The Kazi went personally to the Governor and told him 
everything about Thakur Haridas concluding with the request that as Thakur 
Haridas was guilty of the offense of living as a Hindu, although he is a 
Muhammedan born, he should be dealt with in a decisive manner. 

“The Governor,” writes Thakur Brindavandas, “who was himself also of a 
worldly disposition, on the representations of the misguided Kazi, 
ordered Thakur Haridas to be seized and brought before him at once. 

Haridas voluntarily offered to accompany the men despatched to seize his person 
by violence and to appear before the Governor.” “By the Grace of Krishna, 
Thakur Haridas,” says the author of the Chaitanya Bhagavata, “was not afraid of 
death not to speak of the Moslem ruler. Thakur Haridas, with the chant of the 
Name of Krishna on his lips, set out immediately and presented himself before 
the Governor. All the good people of Fulia, apprehending the worst, were 



filled with sorrow and dismay on being thus suddenly and violently deprived of 
his happy companionship.” 


And now an incident occurred which throws much light on the true personality 
of Thakur Haridas. As soon as the tidings of the seizure of Haridas reached 
the prison of the Governor, the leading persons of all those parts, who 
were confined in the jail at that time, experienced a great joy in the core of 
their hearts at the news. “They thought,” writes Thakur Brindavandas, “that 
as Thakur Haridas was the greatest of Vaishnavas. The miseries of their 
captivity were sure to end by the sight of him. They accordingly persuaded their 
keepers to afford them an opportunity of obtaining a glimpse of the great devotee 
as he passed by the prison house. Those captives awaited the arrival of 
Thakur Haridas with their eyes fixed to the path by which he was to pass. 

Thakur Haridas came to the spot and on catching sight of the prisoners he 
mentally cast the glance of mercy on them. The prisoners fixing their eyes to the 
feet of Thakur Haridas remained in the posture of obeisance. They saw that 
Thakur Haridas was surpassingly handsome. His hands reached down to the 
knee. His eyes were like the lotus flower. His incomparable moonlike face was, 
however, the most beautiful of all. 

All the prisoners bowed with a natural and loyal impulse of submissive devotion. 
They at once underwent the spiritual perturbations of devotion to Krishna. Lord 
Haridas noticed the devotional activity of them all and finding that they were in 
chains broke into a smile of mercy. “May you continue to remain in your present 
condition,” said Thakur Haridas. He began to laugh merrily after pronouncing 
this veiled benediction. The prisoners failing to comprehend the real meaning, 
which is, indeed, very difficult to understand, were somewhat depressed on 
hearing these words. 

Haridas Thakur was thereby moved to the mood of pity and at once proceeded to 
explain clearly the import of his words. “I have indeed conveyed my concealed 
benediction to you all by means of those words. You feel dejected because you 
do not understand this. I never bless amiss. You will understand this If you give 
my words your close consideration. May the minds of all of you remain 
constantly turned towards Krishna as they actually are just now. May all of you 
from now jointly chant the Eternal Name of Krishna and think only of Him. 
There is now no malice, no thought of oppressing any creature, in your hearts. 
May you meditate on Krishna by taking His Name with all humility. If you go 
into the world once more you run the risk of forgetting Him again by mixing 



with the worldly people. Love for Krishna cannot co-exist with any form of 
worldliness. Know it for certain that from one who is of a worldly disposition 
Krishna is always very far off. The mind, that is engrossed with the pursuit of the 
objects of this world, is a great nuisance. Wife, sons and all worldly objects are 
the toils of delusion. All these are ‘death’. It is by Providential contrivance that 
any fortunate person gains real contact with the pure devotees of Godhead and, 
being thereby enabled to give up his attachment for the world, is in a position to 
devote himself to the service of Krishna. All those offenses that are now absent 
from your minds will once more be committed when you mix with the worldly 
people. It is the nature of this world. This is the gist of all that you require to be 
told for your benefit. Give it your most attentive hearing. I pronounced this great 
benediction which you misunderstood. It is not my desire that you may continue 
to remain in this state of captivity. Forget the world and take the Name of ‘Hari’ 
night and day. I pronounced this only benediction in a disguised form. Feel no 
dejection, no, not even for a moment. I see all persons who are really in the 
fetters of this world with the eye of pity. May all of you attain to firm devotion to 
Krishna. Have no anxiety. I assure you that you will be freed from your captivity 
in the course of two or three days. Whether you engage in ordinary worldly 
pursuits, or wherever you be, never forget your present resolve by any means.” 
Having sought to promote the true well-being of the prisoners in the above 
manner Thakur Haridas proceeded on his way and duly presented himself before 
the Governor of the District. 

The advice to the prisoners makes the position of Thakur Haridas clearer. It is 
necessary to chant the Name of Krishna, to mediate on Krishna, instead of being 
engrossed in worldly pursuits. For this purpose the state of captivity is more 
favourable than the state of bodily freedom, provided one is really inclined 
towards Krishna. It is very difficult to remember Krishna in the midst of the 
thousand and one pre-occupations of the worldly life, Krishna and worldliness 
having no connection with one another, the two being perfectly incompatible. It 
is never possible to serve both. A worldly-minded person can have nothing to do 
with Krishna. It is never possible to worship Krishna in the intervals of 
worldliness. The slightest inclination to worldliness should be impossible to a 
person who is at all inclined to Krishna. It is necessary to understand clearly that 
as long as the least inclination for worldliness persists in our minds there can be 
no love for Krishna. The society of worldly people has this tendency of making 
us wholly forget Krishna. Wife and children are cited as instances of the deadly 
traps that are laid by the Delusive Energy for encompassing our ruin. The 
attachment for wife and children and other worldly objects can be overcome 



only by association with the sadhus. In the company of the sadhus our 
attachments are deflected towards Krishna. Therefore, Haridas properly enough 
exhorts the prisoners to forget the world completely and chant the Name of 
Krishna night and day. 

The function of the soul, who is anxious to be restored to his natural condition of 
loving devotion to the Lotus Feet of Krishna, is very simple. One must willingly 
turn his thoughts and activities towards Krishna. He can do so most naturally by 
association with the devotees of Krishna. The devotees of Krishna always serve 
Krishna and do nothing else. By adopting their life under their direction love for 
Krishna is gradually aroused in the fettered soul. Attachment for the world is 
automatically dispelled by the dimmest apprehension of such inclination, as 
darkness is dispelled by the glow of the reflected light that harbingers the 
approach of Sunrise. 

The cultivation of association with the devotees is the only method of attaining 
to the natural function of the soul, viz., unalloyed love for Krishna. 

This inclination for the society of sadhus, which is inherent in every soul, is 
liable to be rendered ineffective by association with worldly people. Pure 
devotees and worldly people and worldly objects generally present 
themselves simultaneously and claim our service, as rivals. We cannot choose 
both. If we choose one of them we completely lose sight of the other. They are 
related to one another as darkness and light. The light of this phenomenal 
world imperceptibly shades off into darkness, so that it is not possible to fix a 
line of real demarcation between the two. But the darkness of the non-spiritual 
state has a definite line of demarcation. Until this line is passed we can 
have absolutely no idea of the spiritual state. Abetter analog from this point of 
view is furnished by the case of life and death. Death is not an attenuation of life. 
It is the complete cessation of life. We cannot have both simultaneously. It is 
not possible to mix up the two. It is also possible to ascertain perfectly the 
dividing line between the two. A dying person is a living person to the last 
moment that he retains his animation in however attenuated a form. When he 
dies he passes completely out of life. The smallest fraction of a second makes a 
complete rupture, not merely a graduated difference. A dead man cannot also 
come into life again. 

This is the reason why the acceptance of a person as disciple by the spiritual 
guide has been called the second birth. The seminal birth does not give 
the spiritual life. One is spiritually dead till the second birth. One is born a 



third time on receiving the full enlightenment of diksha. The first is the 
seminal birth, the second is initiation or admission for enlightenment, the third 
birth is brought about when one attains to the state of actual enlightenment. The 
first is the condition of spiritual death, the second is the quasi-living state, the 
third is the normal living condition. One who has any real experience of life and 
death cannot prefer death to life; neither can he plead for an unnatural 
and impossible mixture of the two. 

We must not suppose that we are asked to accept anything blindly when we are 
told to accept the life that was actually led by Thakur Haridas. If any one 
shouts the Name of Krishna three or any number of lakhs of times everyday 
and abstains from open debauchery or detectable forms of gross worldliness, 
he cannot thereby mechanically attain to the spiritual plane. It is not 
mechanical, nor even mental, activities and attitudes, that we are asked to adopt. 
As soon as the Name of Krishna manifests Himself to our spiritual ear we obtain 
the power of vision that can distinguish between the substance and the shadow. 
The shadow now no longer stands in the way of our dealings with the 
substance. Those, who are under the misapprehension that the shadow is 
everything and behave and think accordingly, cannot at all understand the ways 
of the devotee of Godhead. 

The very idea of service is incomprehensible to the material mind. The material 
mind is connected by the relationship of the deluded pseudo-enjoyer to 
the objects that lie exposed to the physical senses. It misconceives certain forms 
of such enjoyment to be 'service’. It thinks that its very existence is dependent 
on and consists of such enjoyment. Therefore, whenever it finds anybody 
behaving on a different principle it judges him, consistently enough, to be in the 
wrong and his course as suicidal. While the real Truth is that the judge himself is 
all the time pursuing the course that leads to death while the sadhu has his 
face eternally turned towards the Life Eternal. 

How can one live at all unless one eats and tries to procure food, clothing and 
shelter? Thakur Haridas also, it is supposed, required all these ‘necessaries’ 
of life. Once this is admitted it follows that one must lead the worldly life as 
a matter of course. But Thakur Haridas says that nothing is necessary 
except taking the Name of Krishna. If he is asked why he himself eats, drinks, 
sleeps and does other kinds of work in the same way as another person, he 
simply replies that he does nothing of the kind. The objection may prefer to 
believe the testimony of his senses and consider Thakur Haridas to be a 



shameless liar. It is of course, perfectly open to him to do so. But even by 
disbelieving Haridas he does not establish the Truth of his own contention. All 
that is proved is that if both of them are assumed to tell the Truth their points of 
view must be admitted to differ widely. This brings us back to a re-examination 
of the bases on which they take their respective stand. If we do so without bias 
we should be impressed by the conviction that the method of Thakur Haridas 
may lead us to the Truth, but the method of the mentalist can never do so. 

True, we may pretend to stick to that course into which we suppose we have 
been born by the Will of Godhead. But what right have we to suppose that 
the phenomena of birth and death themselves may not be as deceptive as any 
other similar phenomenon? So the question cannot be solved if we choose 
merely to stick to the testimony of our deluding senses on the ground that it 
happens to be so. If it be our fore-gone conclusion to adopt that course which 
seems more likely to enable us to exploit for our transitory pleasure the 
questionable so-called facilities offered by this world, we do not admittedly 
approach the issue for the impartial purpose of finding out the Truth before our 
conclusion is declared. If by taking the Name of Krishna in the manner that is 
free from offense the senses themselves are transformed why should it be still 
necessary for us to obey the dictates of the old, non-spiritual faculties? If I 
actually can see that it is Godhead Himself Who always feeds and clothes me, 
why should I still consider it my duty to maintain it is I who feed and clothe 
myself? If I clearly realize my blunder, why should it still be my duty to stick to 
it? One, who tries to mechanically imitate Thakur Haridas, without possessing 
his vision and purpose, should find it impossible and inconvenient to imitate 
his whole conduct, as will be evident from the incident that we are going 
to describe just now. 

After endeavoring to compass the good of the prisoners Thakur Haridas made 
his way to the presence of the Governor. The Governor was fascinated by 
the extraordinary charm and force of personality of Thakur Haridas. 

He accordingly offered him a seat with the greatest respect. The ruler of the 
mulk himself then questioned him. The questions of the Governor have 
been preserved by Thakur Brindavandas in his account of Sree Chaitanya. 

The Governor said in effect, ‘Brother, what is the cause of this peculiar 
disposition in you? It is no small good fortune whereby you have been born a 
Yavana. Why then do you incline to the practices of the Hindus? We don’t touch 
our food if we but chance to see a Hindu. Why do you give up the superiority 
that accrues to you by your birth in our great race ? You behave unnaturally 



by transgressing against your race and religion. You cannot hope to escape the 
dire consequences of such gross offense, at any rate in the next world. 

The malpractices, of which you have been guilty through ignorance, are a 
sin against Godhead. By all means do get absolved form these heinous offenses 
by uttering the formula (qalma) of the faith.’ 

Thakur Brindavandas comments on the speech of the Governor as proceeding 
from a person whose judgment was stupefied by the deluding energy 
of Godhead. Haridas only burst into a loud laughter, “Lo, the Deluding Power of 
Vishnu !” said he, and then began to reply in a sweet manner. “Listen, dear one, 
there is only one Godhead and He is the Lord of Everything. It is the 
mere concocted name that makes all the difference between ‘Hindu , and 
‘Yavana’. 

The Veda and the Koran alike declare the summum bonum to be one and the 
same for all. The one eternal entity, free from all defect, indivisible 
and indestructible, occupies fully the seat of heart of everyone. All the 
worlds function exactly in the way in which the one Supreme Lord guides the 
minds of His servitors. It is the Name and Quality of the Selfsame Lord on 
Whom all persons discourse in conformity with the declarations of their 
respective Scriptures. He, Who is Godhead, takes cognizance of the disposition 
that prompts the utterances of all persons. Whence I am doing exactly that 
very thing to which Godhead directs my mind. It is analogous to the conduct of 
a person who, being a Brahmana and born in the Hindu community, 
is sometimes found to become a Yavana by his own free choice. What can 
even being a Hindu avail such a person? The deeds of every person are entirely 
his own concern. What is the good of killing a person who has himself 
committed suicide? Good sir, judge my case accordingly. If there be no real 
lapse on my part, do by all means punish me for my offense.” 

These wholesome and true words of Thakur Haridas satisfied all the Yavanas 
who heard them. There was, however, one solitary exception. An 
ecclesiastic (kazi), who was a great offender against Godhead, now tendered 
quite different advice to the Governor. He said to the Governor, “Punish this 
person. This wicked one will lead many others into his folly. He will bring low 
the prestige of the Yavana race. For this reason let him be punished in all 
seriousness. As an alternative let him recite his own Scriptures.” 


On this the Governor spoke once more to Haridas, ’’Dear brother, profess your 



own Shastra and be relieved of all anxiety. If you do not do so all 
the ecclesiastics will band together and punish you. You yourself will also say 
your own Shastra in the long run. Then what is the good of your choosing to 
be lowered in the estimation of the people?” 

Haridas said, “No one can do anything else than what Godhead makes him do. 

Know it as certain that it is Godhead Who awards the punishment that is the fruit 
of offense committed by ourselves. If my body be hacked to pieces, if life itself 
desert me, even then I will not give up the Name of Hari.” 

The ruler of the place, on hearing his words, put the issue to the ecclesiastics, 
“What will you do to him now ?” The Moslem ecclesiastic (kazi) gave 
his verdict, “Let him be whipped at the twenty-two market-places. Take his 
life without any hesitation. If he survives the beating at the twenty-two 
markets, then I should he prepared to admit the truth of what the sages have 
declared.” 

I have tried to reproduce the actual wording of Sree Brindavandas’s account of 
the famous trial of Thakur Haridas. We should now try to put ourselves into the 
attitude of the saintly narrator in order to be able to understand the real meaning 
of his words. 

But before we proceed to do so it is necessary to offer a few remarks as regards 
the canon by which the authenticity of a statement is to be tested. It is not 
the practice in the conventional history to use the method of direct 
narration unless the words actually spoken can be reproduced verbatim, and even 
in such case it is very rarely, indeed, that recourse is had to this direct method. In 
the Biographies of Sree Chaitanya penned by Thakur Brindavandas and 
other contemporaries and followers the method of recording the speeches of 
the actors has been used very frequently and the followers of the Lord accept 
the version of the Biographies as the actual language used by Sree 
Chaitanya Himself. 

The value of the actual words used by the speaker is even greater in the case of 
theistic history than in secular narrative. In theistic history only the actual words 
of the devotees convey the furl meaning intended by them. The words are living 
entities. This is the reason why these authors are so careful to give us the actual 
words of the devotees whose views they record. In this connection we should 



remember that the method that is being followed in the compilation of the 
present work is not the empiric method of induction-cum-deduction but that of 
manifestation of the Truth in the Form of the articulated Transcendental Sound. 
In this method the value of every single word, actually spoken by the devotee, is 
worth preserving and the original text is therefore all-important. 

It is possible for the devotee of Godhead to supply us with the actual words of 
the Divinity. The slightest deviation from the Divine Language is also for 
the same reason detectable by the devotee. The language in the form of 
direct narration is, therefore, not a departure from the Truth in this case, but 
the closest adherence to Him. In the form of indirect narration the 
writer’s personality is the obtruding and dominating factor. In theistic history 
the personal equation should be non-existent; and, therefore, its indirect 
narration should also be acceptable in proportion as it approximates the direct 
form. This is also the reason why quotations of actual texts are so much 
esteemed in the theistic method of narration. Sree Jiva Goswami Prabhu has 
tried to clothe his highest conclusions in the language of the Scriptures. The 
method of Sree Jiva Goswami is a part and parcel of his function as the real 
exponent of the Absolute. 

If it be urged why it is necessary also to preserve the actual words of the 
opponents of the devotees, as has been done in this case, the explanation is 
that the words of a person, who is adverse to Godhead, when directed to the 
devotee of Godhead even by way of opposition, do no longer point to the 
mundane objective and for this reason acquire special value for the instruction of 
novices. Nothing can purely express one’s personality except the words spoken 
by the person himself. The indirect method of narration is due to the inability of 
the writer to understand the real character of a person with sufficient 
distinctness. There need be no categorical distinction between the dramatic 
or conversational form and that of indirect narration which has found so 
great favour, by reason of its very insufficiency, in all so called serious 
compositions of these days. The indirect narration is suitable as medium of 
expression in the case of inanimate objects or when the narrative is intentionally 
converted into a monologue. Either of these, if properly used in place of the 
other, would be a deviation from the Truth, and would, therefore, be 
inadmissible, unless required for the purpose of expressing the Truth. 


To proceed with our narrative, the issue, that was put before the Governor by the 
Kazi and used by him in punishing Thakur Haridas, is by no means so crude and 



unimportant as it may appear to a moderner to whom religious toleration is 
supposed to be ‘as the very breath of his nostrils’. The Kazi said that as the 
Moslem community are upholders of the Truth, Who can be but One, they have 
a right to convert others to their faith by any method, even by force, for the good 
of all parties. In case of extreme perversity the true believer has also the 
benevolent right, on the same principle, of even putting an end to the earthly 
existence of a person who sets himself in opposition to the Truth, for vindicating 
the supreme necessity, on the part of all lovers of the Truth, of supporting the 
cause of the Truth at all costs to prevent any misunderstanding. If cognizance is 
to be taken at all of any lapse from the Truth no sentence, that will not maintain 
the claim of the Truth to our fullest allegiance under all circumstances, can be a 
true verdict. 

Those, who do not profess to be the exclusive servants of the Absolute Truth, 
need find no difficulty in practicing the duty of tolerating untruth without losing 
their self complaisance. But the real lover of the Absolute cannot hasten to make 
terms with untruth in order to satisfy the tendency of aversion to Truth that is 
eternally inherent in the very nature of the dissociable particles of the Divine 
Essence, viz. , the jiva souls. The uncompromising and even violent or impatient 
opposition of a lover of the Truth to all suggestions of the lower self, who is 
always whispering into his ears the counsels of disloyalty, may appear to be 
intolerable to one who is complacently disposed towards the pernicious 
tendency, but should not be justified on this ground by those who are not also 
themselves disloyal. 

Thakur Haridas did not blame the Kazi and the Governor for their intolerance of 
untruth but for their hallucination which led them to mistake their own disloyalty 
to the Truth for the undoubtedly good quality of uncompromising loyalty. 
Intolerance, said Thakur Haridas, is impossible for one who is really a lover of 
Godhead. Such a person can naturally blame nobody excepting himself when he 
finds anything to be wrong. There can be no activity on any plane except by the 
will of Godhead. If any activity is blamed or praised it shows the disposition to 
judge the doings of Godhead Himself. Any thought against any person is nothing 
short of malice against Godhead Himself. The Scriptures themselves are also not 
really different from one another, if they are rightly understood. Those who do 
not understand their real meaning are alone disposed to differentiate between the 
Scriptures and revealed forms of worship which are all directed to the One 
Godhead. 



The question of religious toleration is a matter of the highest practical 
importance. Those who maintain the doctrine of intolerance of untruth can only 
be properly answered by the higher doctrine of the realization of the Hand of the 
Supreme Lord in everything, except in the matter of the individual judgment. 

The soul can really do no wrong. Godhead is solely responsible for all activities 
of the world. The soul can be deluded and, in the state of delusion only, he can 
imagine right and wrong. This deluded condition is full of misery for the soul 
himself; and for this he should be an object of pity. The deluded soul is, however 
deluded also by the Will of Godhead. Therefore, the delusion cannot be blamed. 
The cause of the deluded state is inherent in the jiva soul as the necessary 
condition of his dissociable individual existence. 

It is, no doubt, necessary to get rid of the deluded state. But it is not possible to 
bring this about by a policy of violence. As soon as one is disposed to be 
violent he is subjected by his own activity to the delusion that he, or anybody 
else except Godhead, is responsible for the ordering of this world. And if 
one persists in acting under such delusion he is himself deluded by his own 
acts. This is the meaning of the Koran. Those who imagine that the delusion is 
cured by putting the unbeliever to death, are themselves deluded. The only way, 
in which one can help both oneself and others, is by trying to avoid falling 
under the delusion that anybody except Godhead can do anything either good or 
bad. There is nothing good or bad but our disloyal thinking makes it so. 

The policy of real toleration is not inconsistent with, but on the other hand 
indispensable for, the relation of the true service of Godhead. The toleration, that 
is disposed to dally with untruth is inconsistent with loyalty, is really due to 
aversion to the Truth, and is, therefore, more disastrous in its consequences than 
intolerance of untruth which it pretends to condemn. 

The policy of sincere intolerance of untruth, although it is better than disloyal 
tolerance of untruth, is thus itself a mischievous delusion. The chaste and 
loyal wife may consider it her duty not only to cut off the connection with 
all unchaste women but to revile and punish them for their misconduct. But 
if those unchaste women could be reclaimed by a policy of milder firmness 
their husbands would have real cause to thank this loyal wife of another person 
for her benevolent and really kind disposition. This would certainly be no 
neglect of her duty towards her own husband. 


We crave the kind indulgence of the reader to tolerate an unhappy metaphor to 



elucidate the position of the loyal servant of Krishna which cannot be 
fully explained by our defective vocabulary. The unchaste wives, in the case 
of spiritual service, have really also no other husbands than Krishna. They 
are, therefore, the co-wives of the loyal matron. It should, therefore, be a duty of 
the chaste wife towards her Husband to try her best to reclaim the unchaste 
ladies. If the chaste wife does not do this she is herself proved to be disloyal to 
her Husband to that extent. 

Krishna is not pleased by the malice of loveless fanatics any more than by the 
covert disloyalty of pseudo-latitudinarians. Fanaticism is due to ignorance of the 
Perfect Nature of Krishna and of our common relationship with Him. It is also a 
proof of our want of faith in the Dispensation of the Supreme Lord. It is of 
course absolutely necessary to keep wholly aloof from all unbelievers in 
the matter of loyalty to Krishna. But this should be coupled with the desire 
to benefit the deluded souls by trying to win them over to the service of Krishna. 

This duty, as the present episode shows, cannot be neglected with impunity 
without producing the most tragic results. The fanatical Kazi could dupe 
those who were maliciously disposed like himself to join with him in 
practicing terrible oppression on a devoted servant of Godhead, on the strength 
of a narrow interpretation of certain texts of the Koran condemnatory of 
association with unbelievers. Those passages, if rightly understood, are a 
condemnation of disloyalty to Godhead. But malice towards any creature, as 
Thakur Haridas took care to point out, is malice against Godhead Himself and 
such disloyalty is not less condemnable than any of the other more familiar 
forms of that pernicious tendency. 

Loyalty to Krishna necessarily means perfect toleration, nay perfect positive 
good will, towards all creatures good and bad. Nothing less than this can 
satisfy Krishna. But perfect toleration or good-will towards the misguided soul 
need not be perversely supposed to mean either toleration or sympathy for 
the motive that lies behind the conduct of such a person. There can be 
no toleration of the tendency to untruth. There must be perfect toleration of 
the activities of misguided persons as Krishna does not cherish any ill-will 
against them, nay permits those activities with the object of effecting their 
reclamation thereby. Loyalty to Krishna should express itself by serving the 
perfect goodwill of Krishna towards all creatures and realizing the Mercy of 
Godhead in the activities, as distinct from the motive, of even those persons who 
are most averse to Krishna. Those, who find fault with the activities of 



unbelievers from malice, forget that those activities are possible only by the 
Sanction of Krishna and that by one’s malicious opposition of those activities it 
is Krishna against Whom our malice is really directed. That this must be so is 
proved by the fiendish persecution that was now launched against Thakur 
Haridas. 

Therefore, the excuse that, as it is not possible to distinguish between a believer 
and unbeliever except by conduct and profession and as it is our duty to Krishna 
to discourage disloyalty to Him by all means in our power, the persecution of 
Haridas can be defended as being due to a strong sense of loyalty to Godhead, is 
wholly untenable. Krishna can be properly served only when we possess the 
knowledge of His Real Nature. Krishna does not want us to discourage 
disloyalty to Him by hypocritically or maliciously opposing His wise and 
benevolent method for the reclamation of disloyal persons. In other 
words, fanaticism is the result of culpable ignorance due to a radically disloyal 
and unserving disposition. Recourse to violence, either physical, mental or 
spiritual, is directly opposed to the Purpose of Krishna, because violence is 
powerless against the soul who, being the essence of Krishna, possesses His 
perfect freedom of will. The freedom of will of the soul is indestructible. He can 
be reclaimed only by an appeal to his judgment and free will. Those, who 
advocate the policy of violence, are far away from Krishna and perfectly 
ignorant of the nature of their own selves. 

Faith in Krishna is the natural attitude of the pure soul. Fanaticism is the 
hypocritical and malicious caricature of spiritual faith by the soul in the state 
of utter delusion. Fanaticism, being essentially an attitude of opposition 
to Krishna, is also necessarily intolerant of all loyal servants of the Supreme 
Lord. It is not by accident that the fanatics crucified Jesus. The fanatics can 
never tolerate the good-will of Krishna towards all His creatures. They pretend 
to show their love ( ?) for Krishna by hating His loved ones. 

The fanatics are bound to hate everybody because they really hate the Supreme 
Lord Himself. They, therefore, also hate those who are averse to Krishna, 
not from a sense of loyalty to Krishna but, because they themselves are 
unmindful of the service of Krishna and want everybody to serve them. 
Fanaticism always kindles counter-fanaticism in those of its victims who happen 
to be equally averse to Krishna. But it is powerless to move the servant of 
Godhead to thoughts of malice against his deluded oppressors. 



By command of the Governor wicked ruffians laid violent hands on Thakur 
Haridas. They beat him most ferociously from market to market to put an end to 
the least sign of life. Haridas remembered to repeat the Name of Krishna. There 
was no manifestation of bodily pain by the bliss of the Name. All good men 
experienced boundless grief on witnessing the utmost severity of the beating that 
was inflicted on the person of Haridas. Some apprehended the ruin of the whole 
kingdom from such treatment of a good person in view of the people. Others 
openly expressed their indignation against King and Minister. There was some 
display of actual violent opposition also. Intimidation was combined with the 
offer of bribes to soften the harshness of those ruffians. But all was to no 
purpose. They beat him severely from market to market. Haridas did not 
experience the least bodily pain by the Grace of Krishna, even under such 
ferocious castigation. Thakur Brindavandas compares his condition to that of the 
great devotee, the child Prahlada, who passed unscathed through all 
hurt inflicted by the atheists (asuras). The writer assures his readers that 
inasmuch as one, who remembers Haridas, is thereby delivered completely from 
the possibility of all bodily pain, it is no wonder that Haridas himself was 
also perfectly immune from all such pain on this occasion. 

Those, who suppose that the above is the exaggerated version of a petty incident, 
or may be disposed to minimize or explain away its real significance, are 
perfectly free to do so. It is not also impossible to adduce instances of 
the marvelous powers of endurance of the worst of criminals under 
deserved chastisement. The story of Prahlada may itself be dismissed as a 
concoction of the fertile imagination of writers who find a senile pleasure only in 
praising deeds of transcendental performances. The sedulous cultivation of a 
taste for the super-natural is also supposed to be that unfortunate trait in the 
Indian character that distinguishes the Hindus even in the twentieth century from 
the saner peoples of every other part of the world. It is for this reason that 
foreign writers, who are really well-disposed towards the Indians, find 
themselves at the end of their resources to invent a suitable apology for this 
favourite defect of the narrators of the Indian spiritual traditions that are 
cherished with the utmost tenacity and reverence by this strange people. 

If instead of allowing ourselves to be obsessed by our indigenous or foreign 
prejudices we stop to consider seriously the version of the event from the pen of 
the contemporaneous writer in order to arrive at the truth that he is anxious to 
impress on our minds, we should not fail to be struck by certain very remarkable 
points in the above narrative. In the first place it is evidently not the intention of 



the writer to arouse animosity against the Yavanas. Had this been his real object 
he would not have taken the trouble of insisting on the point that Haridas 
actually suffered no pain. Neither could it also be the object of the writer to 
praise Haridas for his courage or power of endurance. In fact he does not want to 
praise any worldly merit or condemn any worldly demerit. He is wholly 
indifferent to such issues which alone possess any interest for the secular 
historian. 

Thakur Brindavandas is trying to understand the experiences of Haridas in terms 
of his own. What he means to say in effect is this: ‘I, who have been immune 
from all bodily pain by the mere recollection of Haridas, am in a position to 
testify to the fact that neither he nor Prahlada can ever really be subject to bodily 
pain’. So it is necessary to understand what the writer really means. If it be asked 
why others are not similarly relieved of their sufferings by the mere recollection 
of Haridas? Why were not those people, who had an opportunity of actually 
witnessing all these events, instantly relieved of all anxiety on his account by the 
very sight of him, which should not be regarded as less than recollection? 

Thakur Brindavandas could realize that the devotee of Krishna is not a convict 
who is put in the prison of this world of three dimensions like ordinary 
worldly people. The difficulties of three dimensions are automatically solved on 
the plane of four dimensions although this may pass the understanding of 
those who are privileged to have a view of events on the plane of four 
dimensions from their platform of three dimensions without being able to dive 
into their real meaning. By taking the Name of Krishna one is relieved from all 
worldly sufferings. If one chooses to stick to his platform of three dimensions 
he cannot, merely by uttering the word Krishna, avoid the sufferings of this 
world. The sufferings of the body are a part and parcel of the phenomenal world. 
The soul does not belong to the phenomenal world and is, therefore, not subject 
to bodily sufferings. This is logical. But how can this be actually realized 
in practice? It can be realized in this world by only one method, viz., by 
uttering constantly the spiritual Name of Krishna. This is Divinely ordained as 
there cannot be any mere logical way out of this insuperable difficulty. 

The devotee of Krishna is relieved from all bodily and mental suffering by the 
realization of his natural condition, viz., that of the soul. The tree is to be judged 
by its fruit. If by uttering the Name of Krishna one is not wholly relieved from 
all worldly trouble he cannot claim to have succeeded in taking the Holy Name. 

It is only the pure soul who can really utter the Name of Krishna. It is only by 



uttering the name of Krishna, by listening to the same from the lips of a devotee, 
that one can attain to one’s natural spiritual condition when alone he is fit to take 
the Name of Krishna. It is only by getting out of the sphere of three dimensions 
or any dimensions that all unwholesomeness can be finally, logically and 
naturally eliminated. 

Those, who pray to Godhead to give them the power of endurance under trial; 
commit a great blunder. Those, who pray to be permitted to serve Godhead 
on the plane of the Absolute by His causeless grace, alone pray truly. Prayer 
means unconditional reliance on the Grace of Godhead. The Grace of Godhead 
is perfectly wholesome and need not be reminded of our wrong aspirations by 
the method of selfish, criminal insistence for their dire fulfillment. Those who 
pray in order to gain any object of their present ambition, do not pray at all in 
the Scriptural sense. The Grace of Godhead will revolutionize our limited 
outlook and impart other ambitions than those that are giving us such 
interminable and unrelievable trouble. 

Those ruffians and on-lookers, who were interested in the fate of Haridas, were 
all of them equally misguided in supposing that a devotee is subject to 
bodily sufferings like themselves. It is to prove by his teaching as well as 
conduct that he is not subject to any worldly suffering, that Thakur Haridas was 
displaying those activities in order to induce them to believe in the absolute 
Truth of what he taught. He, who has himself attained to real immunity from all 
suffering, is the proper person to be approached as a teacher of the true method 
for attaining to the free state. Those ruffians and on-lookers were 
apparently innocent of any such purpose, except a very few who were led to 
reflect seriously on the real meaning for themselves of those events. 

So the mere sight of a Vaishnava under the impression that he is only a mortal, 
or the mere recollection of a Vaishnava viewed as a mortal, are 
properly speaking not seeing or recollecting him at all. The Vaishnava can be 
really seen and recollected only on the plane of the Absolute by the pure eye of 
faith possessed by the soul in the state of Grace. The recollection of such a sight 
has the efficacy of freeing from all difficulties. The endeavour to attain such 
sight and recollection is the spiritual practice available to the novice by the grace 
of the spiritual teacher. The process of spiritual novitiate under a pure devotee 
is not ignored by the words of Thakur Brindavandas. The novitiate itself 
being also spiritual in character cannot be attained in this Iron Age except by 
the method of perfect submission to the teachings of Thakur Haridas and of 



those who are privileged to see as well as remember him as he really is. He is 
the Acharyya of this Age of Evil. By following his teaching and practice one can 
be easily freed from every difficulty. There is no other way of our final and 
true liberation. 



Chapter 21 Thakur Haridas (Contd.) 


Thakur Haridas experienced only one kind of pain while he was undergoing 
ferocious beating at the hands of the minions of the Moslem Governor. He felt 
sorry for those sinners who were involved in this terrible offense against himself. 
He prayed to Krishna to do him this Favour that those miscreants might not incur 
the Divine Displeasure by reason of their ferocious cruelty towards himself. 

Those Yavanas, however, continued to beat him severely from marketplace to 
market-place with the resolve of putting an end to his life. They beat him with all 
the strength they had. Haridas had no memory of his mental body and was 
perfectly immune from any sensation of suffering which was actually inflicted 
on his physical body. Neither did he die. The Yavanas now experienced a sense 
of surprise in their minds. They thought in this way, ‘ Can the life of a mortal 
survive such beating? The life of a man is extinguished by beating at two, or at 
most three, market-places. We have already beat him at no less than twenty-two 
market-places. Not only does he not die, but, the wonder of all wonders, he 
actually smiles now and then. All of them were filled with a terrible misgiving. “ 
Was this person after all the Pir that people claim him to be?” 

At last the Yavanas put their own plight before Thakur Haridas. They said, 
'“Haridas! you will be the cause of the death of all of us. We have beaten you to 
the best of our ability. But although we are fatigued to death by our severe 
exertions life still refuses to quit your body. It will now be the turn of the Kazi to 
punish us. He will take the lives of all of us.” 

This pathetic and strange protest made Thakur Haridas laugh as he said, “If my 
being alive be the cause of mishap to all of you, mark me well, I will die just 
now before your eyes.” Saying so Thakur Haridas became absorbed in 
the contemplation of Krishna. Haridas, observes Thakur Brindavandas, is 
possessed of all power. He became perfectly inert and there was no sign of the 
breathing activities in any part of his body. 

The sight of this phenomenon filled the Yavanas with great astonishment. They 
conveyed Thakur Haridas to the steps of the entrance of the Governor’s 
residence. The Governor then gave the command, “ Let him have a burial.” The 
Kazi opposed. He said, “ He will fare well after death if he is given the benefit of 
burial. Being born in a superior faith he stooped to accept a low creed. He should 



be dealt with in accordance with the gravity of the offense. It will benefit his 
soul if his body is allowed a burial. Let his body be, therefore, cast into the river 
so that he may be doomed to eternal misery.” 

At these words of the Kazi all the Yavanas caught hold of the body of Thakur 
Haridas with intent to cast him into the Ganges. Thakur Haridas now sat upright 
in the bliss of Divine contemplation and as he did so Viswambhar Who upholds 
the whole world, manifested His Presence in his body. The Presence of 
Viswambhar made it out of the question for any one to move the body of Thakur 
Haridas. Mighty men pushed the body from every side. Lord Haridas remained 
immovable like a great tower. Haridas had been perfectly immersed in the deep 
nectarine Ocean of Krishna-bliss and there had been no manifestation of any 
external consciousness. Haridas had not known whether he was on dry ground, 
in the air above the ground or in the water of the Ganges. The devotion to 
Krishna, manifested in the recollection of Krishna by Prahlada, is the only 
parallel to that of Thakur Haridas. Thakur Haridas’s conduct is also comparable 
to that of Hanuman, the servant of Sree Ramachandra, who submitted to be 
fettered by the Rakshashas of his own accord, out of deference to Brahma. It is 
in the like spirit that Haridas accepted the beating of the Yavanas, for the 
instruction of the world. That teaching is to be found in his words, “ If my 
sufferings know no end, if life itself leaves my body, yet will I not give up 
uttering the Name of Hari with my mouth.” This constant loyalty to the Name is 
the teaching of this most wonderful exhibition of devotion by Thakur Haridas. Is 
it otherwise possible for any one to attempt any harm against Haridas whose 
Protector is Govinda Himself ? All suffering is instantly ended by the 
recollection of Thakur Haridas. How can, therefore, any suffering be inflicted on 
Haridas himself ? Let no one doubt that Haridas is verily the Iswara (Divine 
Ruler) of the world, one of the foremost of the greatest associates of Chaitanya- 
Chandra Himself. 

Then Thakur Haridas exhibited the leela of being cast into the water of the 
Ganges by the Yavanas and lay afloat on the bosom of the holy stream. By the 
Will of Godhead Thakur Haridas soon regained his external consciousness. He 
then came out of the water and got to the bank of the river experiencing all the 
while the fullness of the transcendental bliss. In that manner he came on to the 
town of Fulia continuing to chant loudly the Name of Krishna. 


The Yavanas, as they witnessed this wonderful exhibition of his power, were 
cured of their malice against him and their minds were purified. All bowed to 



him with humility, being convinced that he was, indeed, the Pir. All these 
Yavanas thus received their deliverance. When Thakur Haridas recovered his 
external consciousness he found the Moslem Governor in presence of him. This 
made Thakur Haridas smile as he was moved to mercy. The 
Governor reverentially responded, with palms joined in the act of supplication, 

“I now know most certainly that you are a great Pir. You have realized the 
knowledge of the One. People claim to be in touch with the Supreme Soul, to 
possess the knowledge of Him. But they only use their mouths to utter empty 
words. You have alone attained the realization in very truth. I have personally 
come down here to have a sight of you. Have mercy on me, great one. May you 
be pleased to forgive an my offenses. All are equal in your sight. You have 
neither friend nor foe. There is no person in all the three worlds who can know 
what you are. 

May you proceed auspiciously anywhere of your own free choice and continue 
to stay in your solitary cell on the bank of the Ganges. You may abide 
at whatever place you choose and do whatever you like at your own sweet will.” 

Commenting on this change of heart of his oppressors Thakur Brindavandas 
observes that if even those Yavana miscreants could forget their animosity at the 
sight of the holy feet of Thakur Haridas what to speak of those people who are 
endowed with a natural goodness of disposition ? The change of heart was, 
indeed, quite marvelous. Those Yavanas had come forward in the greatest anger 
to beat him to death. They recognized him as Pir and threw themselves at his feet 
in the end. Thakur Haridas bestowed on the Yavanas his glance of mercy as he 
came on to Fulia. 

Thakur Haridas now presented himself again to the assembly of the Brahmanas 
of Fulia, in the act of chanting the Name of Hari with a loud voice. As they 
caught sight of Thakur Haridas, those Brahmanas of Fulia experienced in their 
minds the bliss that transcends all joys of this world. Those 
Brahmanas spontaneously burst into chanting the Name of Hari. Haridas danced 
with joy in their midst. 

The spiritual perturbations of Haridas pass all attempt at description. There were 
manifest tears, shivering, laughter, swooning, horripilation, thundering 
ejaculation. Haridas would often tumble down headlong on the ground by the 
melting quality of the liquid mellowness of love. The Brahmanas swam on the 
current of a great joy on seeing these edifying exhibitions of love. As Haridas 



became quiet and sat still after a while the Brahmanas also seated themselves in 
a circle round him. 


Haridas then spoke these words to the Brahmanas, “ O ye Brahmanas, cherish no 
sorrow on my account. This has been condign punishment for me who have 
heard endless blasphemy against the Lord. It has been all very well, indeed. It 
has been a source of very great satisfaction to me that the Lord has been pleased 
to pardon a great offense by awarding such light punishment. One is doomed to 
the sufferings of the lowest Hell by the offense of listening to blasphemy against 
Vishnu. With my vile ears I have heard a good deal of the same. The Lord has 
awarded the just punishment for that offense, so that it may not be committed by 
me again.” In this manner Haridas passed the time in the company of those 
Brahmanas in the great joy of the congregational chant of Hari. While all those 
Yavanas, who had given him pain, were utterly ruined. They were destroyed 
with their families in a short time. 

Haridas now lived in his cell in the bank of the Ganges. He lived in seclusion by 
constant recollection of Krishna. He took three lakhs of the Holy Name 
everyday. The cave became to him even as the realm of Vaikuntha. Inside that 
cave there also lived a huge serpent. The extremely venomous quality of 
its poison vitiated the atmosphere of the cave so that no one could bear 
the burning sensation that was experienced on entering the cave. None of 
those, who came to have a sight of Thakur Haridas, could bear to stay in the 
cave. 

They all felt the burning effect of the most virulent poison. But Haridas on his 
part was not aware of it at all. All those Brahmanas then met together and talked 
about it among themselves. They could not understand why there was such a 
great burning sensation in the cell of Haridas. 

There lived in Fulia persons who were skilled in the treatment of poisoning by 
snake-bite. They made the discovery that the sensation was due to the presence 
of some extremely venomous snake within the cave. They informed the people 
about it and said that it was advisable for Thakur Haridas to quit the cave 
without delay and shift to some safe place. Accordingly the people went up to 
Thakur Haridas and implored him earnestly to leave that cave. But Thakur 
Haridas said that he did not experience any inconvenience personally, although 
he had been there for a very long time. However, if they really felt it to be 
unbearable he was willing to move out of the cave the next day if the serpent did 



not shift elsewhere by that time, provided he was there at all, adding, ‘that there 
was, however, no cause for any anxiety’ and bade them to proceed with Krishna 
talk. 

As the people continued their auspicious discourse about Krishna a most 
wonderful event came to pass then and there. On hearing that Haridas was to 
leave the cave the great serpent at once quitted his abode. In the approaching 
gloom of that very evening the huge reptile came out of its hole and moved off 
from the cell in the view of all the people. It was a most beautiful creature, most 
wonderful to see and most deadly, spotted with yellow, blue, and white. A great 
gem burnt on the top of its hood. The Brahmanas were struck with a great fear at 
the sight of the serpent and involuntarily recollected the Name of Krishna As the 
serpent left the place there was no longer any trace of the burning sensation that 
its presence had caused. 

The Brahmanas felt a great joy on being relieved of the presence of the brute in 
that wonderful manner. They conceived a great regard for Thakur Haridas on 
witnessing this exhibition of his great power. It is a small proof of the power of 
Thakur Haridas that the huge snake left the place at his mere word. By the very 
sight of Thakur Haridas the bondage of nescience is snapped at once. Krishna 
does not oppose the word of Thakur Haridas. 

The above incident is recorded in the work of Thakur Brindavandas. Another 
story regarding the greatness of Thakur Haridas is also recorded ~y the same 
writer. It runs as follows:— 

One day at the residence of a wealthy person of Fulia a certain snakebite healer 
was performing a musical dance when Thakur Haridas arrived there by accident 
and stood on one side to witness the dance. There now appeared the Prince of the 
Nagas, by the force of the Mantra taking its effect, in the person of the dancing 
snake-bite healer and began to dance m that human form. He sang in a loud key 
the moving song of pity of the Dance that was enacted by the Lord of dancers in 
the Lake of Kaliya. On hearing the Song of Glory of his own Lord, Haridas fell 
down in a swoon and there was no sign of breath in any part of his body. 
Regaining his consciousness in a short time he gave expression to his joy in 
thundering ejaculations and began to dance rapturously in an infinite variety of 
figures. 


The snake-bite healer on beholding the spiritual possession of Thakur Haridas 



stood still on one side of the arena. Thakur Haridas rolled on the ground decked 
in the wonderful manifestations of tears, horripilation and shivering. The great 
Thakur Haridas was filled with the Presence of Krishna by listening to the chant 
of the Goodness of his Lord and burst into weeping. All the assembled people 
now sang the chant of Krishna, forming a ring round Haridas. The snake-bite 
healer looked on from one side with the palms of his hands joined in the attitude 
of humble supplication. 

The spiritual trance of Haridas lasted for a short time. On its termination the 
snake-bite healer resumed his dance. All the people were filled with great joy by 
witnessing the trance of Thakur Haridas. All the people now began to rub their 
bodies with the dust of every place that was touched by the feet of Thakur 
Haridas. 

There happened to be present in that crowd a hypocritical Brahmana who now 
conceived the fancy of performing a similar dance, under the impression that 
'foolish uncivilized people evince the highest devotion for even an insignificant 
person if he but dances.’ As soon as this thought flashed across the brain of this 
Brahmana he forthwith fell prostrate on the ground and appeared as if bereft of 
all power of movement. But no sooner did he fall in this manner inside the arena 
of the performance of the dance of the snake-bite healer than the latter at once 
began to beat him violently in a frenzy of anger. 

He began to beat him so ferociously on the head and shoulders and on all sides 
of his body with his big cane that the Brahmana was in imminent danger 
of being killed outright by the violence of his repeated blows. The 
Brahmana, groaning with pain under the merciless caning, fled from the spot 
screaming “Oh father!” Thereafter the snake-bite healer danced for a long while 
feeling all along a great delight. 

This strange conduct of the snake-bite healer filled the people with a great 
curiosity. With palms joined in supplication they begged the snake-bite healer to 
tell them the cause of his unnatural behaviour. “ Tell us why” they asked, “ you 
beat this Brahmana. and stood with your palms joined while Haridas danced. We 
wish to hear all about it from your own lips.” 

Thereupon the Naga, devotee of Vishnu, began to speak as follows, through the 
mouth of that snake-bite healer. “ What you have asked is, indeed, a great 
mystery and one that is not to be divulged. Yet I will assuredly tell you about the 



same. On beholding the spiritual trance of Thakur Haridas all of you showed in a 
special manner your great devotion towards him. This Brahmana watched your 
conduct and through sheer malice tumbled on the ground to make a hypocritical 
display of devotion. But no one has power to disturb the joy of my dance by any 
malicious performance. Inasmuch as he falsely set himself up to caricature the 
devotional perturbations of Haridas I have inflicted this severe punishment on 
him. The idea by which this wicked Brahmana was led to act the part of a 
hypocrite was that people might be thereby deceived to honour him as a great 
personage. His only object was self-advertisement by means of an exhibition of 
seemingly pious activity. Such arrogant people have no love for Krishna. One 
may obtain the devotional aptitude to Krishna if only one is perfectly free from 
all desire to deceive. You have witnessed the dance of Haridas. Those, who have 
the good fortune of ever beholding his dance, are wholly relieved from the 
bondage of the world. Krishna Himself dances when Haridas dances. The whole 
world is sanctified by the sight of his dance. He is, indeed, deservedly named 
‘the servant of Hari.’ Krishnachandra eternally dwells in his heart. He is a lover 
of every entity, is the benefactor of all, appearing in the Company of the Lord 
Himself in every birth. He is free from offense against Vishnu and the 
Vaishnavas. His vision does not stray to the wrong path even in sleep. The soul, 
who finds his company for the fraction of a moment, verily gains the Refuge of 
the Lotus Feet of Krishna. The highest souls such as Brahma, Shiva, etc., 
experience a great exultation of heart if they chance to be favoured by the 
company of a devotee like Haridas. He has appeared in an inferior race in order 
to prove the utter worthlessness of birth and lineage for the purpose of 
worshipping Krishna. All the Scriptures declare that if the devotee of Vishnu 
makes his appearance in the lowest of families he is still the only person who is 
fit to be honoured. If one, who is born of the highest lineage, do not serve 
Krishna, he is doomed to perdition, his high birth being of no avail. In order to 
bear testimony to the truth of those declarations of the Veda Haridas appeared in 
a family of the lowest social standing. Just as Prahlada is a demon, Hanuman a 
monkey, so is Haridas a low-born person, only in name The celestials covet the 
touch of Haridas. The Ganges herself desires the immersion of Haridas in her 
sacred stream. It is not necessary to touch but only to have a sight of Haridas, to 
be relieved for-good from the bondage of the eternal chain of one’s fruitive 
activities. If I go on speaking for hundreds of years it would not be possible for 
me to reach the limit of his greatness. You are most fortunate. It is for the sake of 
such as you that this imperfect account of his glory has manifested itself on my 
lips. He who takes the name of Haridas only once, will assuredly attain to the 
Realm of Krishna.” The King of the Nagas lapsed into silence after delivering 



the above discourse. The good people were satisfied on hearing this wonderful 
speech. The great Naga, who is the eternal devotee of Vishnu, made known in 
this manner the nature of the spiritual perturbations of Haridas. All people were 
already well-disposed towards Thakur Haridas. They were most highly delighted 
on learning these things about him from the mouth of the Naga. 

These performances of Thakur Haridas may be ordinarily supposed to belong to 
the class of events that are called miracles in the theology of certain creeds. But 
they are not supernatural occurrences in the sense of being immune from the 
operation of the laws of physical Nature for no other reason than that they are 
the performances of possessors of superior power. Like his immunity from 
physical and mental suffering under severe castigation at the hands of 
the Yavanas, the conduct of Haridas towards the serpent, his dance, 
perturbations and trances are only expressions of his great love for Krishna. 

They are justified and explained properly by the laws of spiritual love which 
transcend, and by transcending fulfill, the imperfect and essentially 
unwholesome laws of physical Nature. 

The cudgeling of the hypocritical Brahmana is similarly an exhibition of love for 
Godhead on the part of the snake-bite healer; while the barbarous behaviour of 
the Yavanas towards Haridas is an act of hatred against the Divinity 
notwithstanding the Scriptural language in which it was sought to be clothed by 
the Kazi. It is not the external appearance of an act that constitutes its spiritual 
worth. In the one case an act of apparent cruelty is to be justly regarded as the 
exhibition of unalloyed devotion to the Tmth; in the other case an externally 
identical act against Thakur Haridas is to be justly condemned as it proceeded 
from sheer malice and cruelty of disposition. So it is not the external appearance 
that determines the spiritual quality of an act. 

But it is much more difficult to prove, to the satisfaction of atheists, how love for 
Krishna can be the sole criterion of spiritual activity. Haridas Thakur cares only 
to act under the impulse of love for Krishna in all situations. It is only for this 
reason and for no other that his conduct is to be regarded as spiritual. The 
relation to Krishna is the only condition by which to distinguish spiritual from 
non-spiritual conduct. 

Spiritual conduct is beneficial to the person practicing it as well as to those who 
are in anyway brought within its influence. Any form of conduct, which is 
devoid of reference to Krishna, is bound to be equally and altogether harmful to 



all parties concerned. It is this consideration which lifts the activities, of the 
theist above the level of the so-called moral conduct, which is related to a 
standard of duty towards others independently of the exclusive reference to the 
Divinity. 

The dance, the trance, the horripilation and other perturbations also belong to the 
category of spiritual activities that are supremely beneficial for all concerned 
because of their exclusive reference to Krishna. If a hungry man is fed by the 
birds at the command of another person, the latter may be credited with the 
possession of extraordinary power for removing physical suffering; but such 
conduct should not, therefore, be called also spiritual, although it may be moral 
in the empiric, i.e, worldly sense which that term has come to acquire quite 
wrongly at the hands of empiric exponents of ethical ( ?) conduct unconnected 
with Godhead. The theistic point of view cannot logically recognize the 
possibility of any person being really benefited by any activity that has no direct, 
conscious and sole reference to Godhead. 

The conduct of the hypocritical Brahmana is on a par with that of the Kazi who 
ordered that Thakur Haridas should be beaten to death for taking the Name of 
Hari. Hypocrisy and fanaticism are not far removed from one another as regards 
genesis. The reference to Krishna may be, and, as a matter of fact, often is, 
intended to cover a selfish purpose. The Kazi wanted to punish Haridas for a 
political and racial reason. The Brahmana sought his own fame and also to spite 
Thakur Haridas. These motives have nothing to do with Krishna Who is the 
Absolute Truth Himself in Whom there can be no scope for malice 
or narrowness. The apparently harsh conduct of the snakebite healer towards 
the hypocritical Brahmana is an act of mercy, solely because it is prompted 
by exclusive regard for the servant of Krishna. 

If Krishna Himself is conceived in any narrow sense any reference to such false 
concept of the corrupt brain of man will not also make one’s conduct spiritual. 
Krishna does not owe His Nature to the particular conception of the person who 
wants to be related to him. There is only one way in which one’s relationship 
with Krishna may be really established, viz., by the resolve of single-hearted 
devotion to the Truth Absolute combined necessarily with the equally single- 
hearted resolve to eschew all association with non-Krishna. Any act, that 
expresses these complementary characteristics, is alone entitled to be designated 
as spiritual conduct. Partiality for any really narrow conception, by merely 
calling the same Krishna, will not enable a person to escape the punishment that 



is due to the enjoyment of non Krishna, any more than any other form of covert 
hostility to the Truth. 


The kind and forbearing attitude of Thakur Haridas towards the offending 
Yavanas must not also be praised for its quality of toleration of any form or 
degree of untruth. Thakur Haridas did not pity the Yavanas for the reason that 
they were not responsible for their ignorance. Haridas knew that ignorance is 
really identical with aversion to Krishna, and he had, therefore no motive to find 
any excuse for their hostility to Truth. All, that he desired to express, was that his 
own punishment was fully deserved and not that the unpardonable aversion to 
Krishna, that was openly displayed by the Kazi and his myrmidons, did not 
deserve to be punished. He was silent on this last point. 

Thakur Haridas passed his days in the performance of the chant of the Name till 
the period when Sree Gaurachandra at last began to manifest His Leela of 
bestowing loving devotion to Krishna on the people of this world. The world 
stood in extreme need of the Manifestation of Divine Mercy in His highest 
perfection. In all parts of the country all the people were altogether lacking in 
devotion to Vishnu. No one knew that there could be such a thing at all as the 
Kirtana of Krishna. Not only was there no sign of any spirit of devotion to 
Vishnu in any part of the country but it was the public fashion to ridicule the 
Vaishnavas. The attitude of hostility and contempt towards the Vaishnavas was 
universal, there being no exception to the rule. This state of public feeling 
compelled the Vaishnavas to sing the Name of Sree Krishna by clap of hand only 
among themselves. Even this modest activity proved too much for the patience 
of those wicked people. The atheists hurled their invectives against the 
Vaishnavas, whenever they met one of themselves. 

The grievance of those people against the Vaishnavas have been recorded by 
Thakur Brindavandas in many passages of his work and we have already 
referred to them at several places of this Narrative. Here are a few additional 
samples of the ordinary charges that were brought against the Vaishnavas by 
their implacable enemies. ‘These Brahmanas will bring ruin upon the country.’ 
‘These Brahmanas resort to various devices in the shape of singing the Name 
with excessive display of sentimentality, in order only to live by begging.’ ‘The 
Lord sleeps during the four months of the rainy season. Is it meet to call upon 
Him with a loud voice at all time? If the sleep of the Lord is broken by their 
noise He will be most angry and afflict the country with famine. There can be no 
doubt of this.’ There were not a few who said, ‘If the price of paddy is found to 



increase ever so little we will make our fists familiar with the shoulders of these 
miscreants . 5 Some opined that ‘it is indeed fit to chant loudly the Name of 
Govinda by keeping awake during the night of the eleventh day of the lunar 
fortnight. What is the use of uttering the Name everyday ? 5 This was the utmost 
concession that the best disposed people of the society were prepared to make to 
the Vaishnavas, although the people in general did by no means endorse such a 
policy of undeserved indulgence towards them. 

The devotees felt sorely grieved at heart by hearing night and day all these 
blasphemies, but no one of them ceased to chant loudly the Name of Krishna 
in the company of the Vaishnavas. Haridas was also filled with sorrow 
on beholding the absence of any regard for the communion of devotion in 
the people. Yet Haridas continued to chant his Lord with a loud voice 
and employed his mouth exclusively to this supreme function. But the loud chant 
of Hari even by Thakur Haridas proved unbearable to certain extremely 
wicked sinners. 

A certain wicked Brahmana, who belonged to the village of Harinadi, angrily 
protested against his practice. “Haridas 55 said he, “what is this that you are 
doing? What is the reason of your uttering the Name with such a loud voice? It is 
enjoined by the religion that the Name is to be taken mentally without being 
audible. What Scriptures tell you of addressing Godhead by calling upon His 
Name with a loud voice? By whose teaching is the Name of Hari recited with a 
loud voice? Let this assembly of the Pandits judge what you have got to say to 
this . 55 

Haridas said, “You are all Pandits and well versed in the Scriptures. You must 
know very well all the reasons in favour of this method. You are also well aware 
of the greatness of the Name of Hari. In reply to your question I can only repeat 
what I have heard from the Pandits such as you are yourselves. If the Name is 
uttered with a loud voice no offense is committed. On the other hand the 
excellence of the process is augmented a hundredfold if me Name is uttered with 
a loud voice. This is declared by the Scriptures. The particular text of 
the Scriptures I refer to, is as follows,— ‘by uttering (the Name) with a loud 
voice the excellence is augmented a hundred-fold . 5 

The Brahmana asked, “What is the reason that the meritorious effect is increased 
a hundred-fold by uttering the Name with a loud voice?” 



Haridas proceeded to explain, “Listen, revered Sir” said he, “the reason of it as 
given in the Veda and the Bhagavatam,. All the Scriptures 
manifested themselves on the holy lips of Thakur Haridas. He was impelled to 
expound by the joy of Krishna bliss. “Hear, O Vipra” said Thakur Haridas, “by 
listening to-the Name of Krishna, only once, beasts, birds and insects find 
unobstructed passage to the Holy Realm of Vaikuntha. Here is my text. “What is 
the wonder of the brute (serpent) being delivered by the touch of the Feet of 
Krishna, by the taking of Whose-Name the person uttering the same is at once 
sanctified among with all those who listen to him?, The beasts, birds, insects, 
etc., cannot utter the Name of Hari. They are saved as soon as they chance to 
hear the Name. If the Name of Sree Krishna is taken mentally only the person 
taking the Holy Name is saved thereby. By chanting the Name with a loud voice 
the chanter benefits others also. It is for this reason that all the Scriptures 
declare that the good is augmented a hundred-fold if the Name is chanted with a 
loud voice. The text of the Bhagavatam is as follows, “It is, indeed, fit that 
the chanter of the Name of Hari with a loud voice is a hundred times better 
than one who takes the Name mentally. The person, who takes the Name 
mentally, saves only himself; one, who chants the Name with a loud voice, saves 
also his hearers.” 

“So by the authority of the Pur ana I hold that one, who chants the Name with a 
loud voice, is a hundred times superior to him who does so mentally. The reason 
of this, O Vipra, also deserves to be listened to most attentively. By mentally 
taking the Name a person maintains only himself. If one chant the Name of 
Govinda with a loud voice every creature is delivered as soon as he hears. All 
animals, with the sole exception of man, although they are privileged to possess 
a tongue, are unable to utter the Sound of the Name of Krishna. The process, by 
which even those, who are born in vain, are saved, certainly does not deserve to 
be condemned. There are those who maintain thousands besides themselves. 
Which of them is superior? This is easy to find by a tittle of reflection. It is for 
this reason that the superior merit of the process of chanting the Name with a 
loud voice is held to be well established.” 

The reply of Thakur Haridas only served to augment the anger of that wicked 
Brahmana who now threw off the mask of the hypocritical inquirer and began 
openly to revile Thakur Haridas. He said, “Haridas has at last become the maker 
of our Philosophy! So the path of the Veda is going to be destroyed before our 
very eyes after enduring through the Ages. It is said that the sudra is destined to 
expound the Veda towards the close of the Iron Age. That thing has come to pass 



at this very moment, without our having to wait for the end of the Yuga. I can 
now see what it really is. You go about from door to door feeding on the choicest 
delicacies by this capital method of cheap self-advertisement. If the explanation 
thou hast offered is proved to be wide of the mark thy nose and ear require to be 
chopped off on the spot. 

On hearing-these blasphemous effusions of that wretch of a Brahmana, Thakur 
Haridas smiled slightly as he uttered the Name of Hari. Without making any 
further reply Haridas left the place continuing to chant the Name of Hari with a 
loud voice. Those, who happened to be present in the assembly, were also sinful 
persons and, being of an evil disposition, made no proper answer to what was 
said by that Brahmana. “All these Brahmanas,” observes Thakur Brindavandas, 
“are verily cannibals (Rakshasas). They are Brahmanas only in name. All of 
them are proper objects of punishment by Yama. In the Kali Yuga all the 
Rakshasas are ordained to be born in the families of the Brahmanas for venting 
their spite against the good people. The Rakshasas, under the fostering care of 
Kali, are born in the womb of Brahmanas. They oppress the few who really 
possess the knowledge of the Vedas. The Dharma-Shastra, indeed, forbids to 
touch, hold talk with or bow to these Brahmanas in any circumstances. What 
more need be said. It is incumbent to avoid addressing or touching those 
Brahmanas, who are non-Vaishnavas, even by mistake. In this world it is one’s 
duty not to see a non-Vaishnava Brahmana, even as one should avoid the sight of 
the dog-eating Chandala. The Vaishnava, although he be born outside the Varnas, 
sanctifies the three worlds. If one, born a Brahmana, be not a Vaishnava, by even 
talking with such a person one loses the merits acquired by his previous good 
deeds.” 

I have reproduced the words of Thakur Brindavandas and also the texts of the 
Scriptures quoted by him. Thakur Brindavandas informs us that a 
terrible calamity overtook the offending Brahmana only a few days after the 
above occurrence. The nose of the Brahmana fell off by an attack of the small¬ 
pox. 

The punishment, which he had proposed for Thakur Haridas, was allotted to 
himself by Krishna. 

We next meet Thakur Haridas in Nabadwip, whither he was attracted by the 

prospect of the society of the Vaishnavas. He resided there, as the 

honoured guest of Sree Advaitacharyya, on a footing of intimate friendship with 



all the devotees. 


It is, however, necessary, before we leave this portion of our narrative, to offer a 
few remarks on an important aspect of the incident just described. 

The method of chanting in company the Name of Hari with a loud voice within 
the hearing of all persons, is the form of worship that was subsequently instituted 
by Sree Chaitanya as the Dispensation for the present controversial Age. The 
only offense, which may stand effectively in the way of one’s taking the Name 
of Hari, is absence of faith in the Transcendental Nature of the Name Himself 
and of Sree Guru on whose, lips the Name manifests Himself. Provided one is 
not deliberately resolved to disbelieve the Divine Nature of the Name and the 
spiritual nature of His chanter there is no other circumstance that can stand in the 
way of one’s taking the Name mentally or uttering Him with a loud voice. The 
second of these methods is called Kirtana. This is held to be much 
more efficacious than the mental process. 

By taking the Name only once a person is relieved from the bondage of 
Nescience for good. On the manifestation of the natural function of the soul 
the abnormal function automatically disappears. The Kirtana or loud chant of 
the Name is the only function of the soul in the state of Divine Grace. By His 
means the whole world is to be saved. This is the Dispensation of this Age. 

But this is vehemently objected to by Brahmanas of the stamp of the person who 
reviled Thakur Haridas at Harinadi. It is necessary to consider the mentality that 
produces such vehement opposition to a method which should appear even to 
those who may not have any faith in it, as hardly capable of giving offense to 
anybody. 

No one is likely to be angry with the loud chanter of the Name of Hari unless he 
is himself accustomed to take the Name in the offensive manner. The rank 
atheist is less dangerous than the hypocrite. A person takes the Name of Hari 
mentally, but opposes the loud chant of the Name. What can be the reason of 
such opposition? It can be but due to the natural partiality for the wrong method 
to which he has been accustomed, as he must believe, on principle. 

But if he is asked further why he takes the Name of Hari even mentally, the 
opposer of the loud chant should have no reasonable answer to give. 

The Transcendental Sound is the Name of Hari. The Name as Sound is identical 



with Hari. Hari’s Name makes His Appearance in this world as Sound through 
the medium of the chanters of the Name. The Name is to be heard only from 
the lips of pure devotees. If He is so heard, even without faith but without 
offense, the dormant function of the soul is aroused thereby, enabling the hearer 
also to chant the Name. As soon as the Name appears on the tongue Hari is fully 
served. But why should the Name, received from His loud chanter, appearing on 
the tongue of the hearer, be recited mentally in order to prevent others 
from hearing Him? 

The mantra, indeed, requires to be repeated to oneself mentally. The mantra is 
also the Name, but not in the form of direct address. The mantra is the formula 
by which the person repeating the same, makes a surrender of his mind and its 
function to the Name who is yet inaccessible to the worshipper because of his 
conditional state. If the Name is compared to the full-blown flower the mantra 
would be comparable to the unopened bud. The mantra is the formula for getting 
rid of the vanity of one’s mental existence. The mantra helps to clear the way for 
the Appearance of the Name. The mantra involves mental surrender to the Guru 
and is, therefore, a deliberate act of conviction on the part of the person who is 
entitled to practice this method. The mantra in fact represents the special favour 
of the Guru and the personal relationship between the disciple and the spiritual 
guide. The imparting of the mantra is tantamount to recognition by the Guru that 
a person is accepted as disciple. This process is called diksha which means the 
bestowal of spiritual enlightenment by elimination of sinfulness, by the spiritual 
guide to the disciple who is disposed by sincere conviction to walk in the path of 
service under Divine Guidance manifested through the Guru. 

The chanting of the Name of Hari, after hearing Him from the lips of the pure 
devotee, in the company of His devotees, is the method of worship that was to be 
promulgated by Sree Chaitanya as the only Dispensation for the Age. Thakur 
Haridas is the Acharyya, or the Divinely Authorized Practicing Teacher, of this 
very function. He is here found to declare that the chanting of the Name with a 
loud voice is open to all persons and does not require on the part of the neophyte 
any precondition of fitness except the absence of deliberate opposition to 
recognizing the Name as being identical with the Transcendental Possessor of 
the Name, i.e., Godhead Himself. If there is no deliberate intention of refusing to 
acknowledge the Divinity of the Name appearing on the lips of the pure devotee 
of Krishna, a person is eligible to hear and, after hearing, sing the Name in the 
company of His devotees by discarding all unnecessary association whim 
unbelievers. By practicing the chant of the Name in this manner, that is to say by 



being free from the offenses of intimate association with unbelievers and the 
intention of deliberately cherishing any doubt or disbelief regarding the Divinity 
of the Holy Name manifesting Himself in the form of the Sound on the lips of 
pure devotees, a person should be enabled in due course to realize the Divine 
Nature of the Name, i.e., of Krishna, His service and of his own soul as being the 
eternal servant of Krishna. 

But the mantra is not really different from the chant of the Name. It only marks a 
stage of progress in an identical process. After the Name begins to be chanted in 
the manner that is free from offense against the Name, one begins to make 
progress on the path of spiritual endeavour. The first sign, that actual progress is 
being made, manifests itself in the form of the conviction that it is necessary to 
follow unconditionally the guidance of the Guru from whose lips the Name has 
been heard. This is the specific entry into the properly serving state of the 
process. 

The position may also be explained in another way. The chanting of the Name 
with a loud voice in the manner that is free from offense is not possible for a 
person till he is relieved of the exclusively mental outlook on life which 
is inevitable in the conditioned state. So long as the mental outlook retains 
its Prevailing force a person cannot conscientiously recognize the necessity 
of unconditional submission to the guidance of the Guru. This is so because 
he cannot realize by mental speculation the spiritual nature of the personality 
of the bona fide Guru and the consequent necessity of unconditional surrender 
to the bona fide spiritual guide. 

It also does not follow that after the mantra is received one is not entitled to 
chant the Name with a loud voice. On the contrary it is the mantra who in his 
turn strengthens the faith of the chanter in the Divinity of the Name by relieving 
him from the obstructive force of mental speculation regarding the spiritual 
function. The mantra has to be repeated mentally because all persons are not 
entitled to listen to it nor does it concern any one else except the person to whom 
it is imparted. The identity between the Name and the mantra is established by 
the fact that the mantra is also the Name with the addition of the personal 
admission that the chanter is convinced that he can be relieved from the state of 
ignorance regarding the spiritual nature of the Name only by following 
unconditionally the guidance of the Guru. 


It will not do to repeat the mantra mentally without receiving the same from the 



Guru, for the reason that the process would then be meaningless. The mantra 
really means that a person places himself under the unconditional guidance of 
the Guru in order to realize the spiritual function of chanting the Name of Hari 
without offense. If there is no Guru whom the person is to follow there is no 
meaning in merely uttering a formula which implies one’s consent to practice 
obedience to the Guru. 

The Guru understands the particular state of spiritual eligibility of the 
conditioned soul and is also aware of Krishna’s intention in regard to him. He 
is the channel used by Krishna to convey His Mercy, to the conditioned soul. 

The best of devotees are alone privileged to enjoy this supreme confidence 
of Krishna. It is the function of the Guru to raise the disciple to the level of 
the intimate confidence of Krishna, because Krishna is fully served only by 
the congregational method to be found in the perfectly spiritual community of 
His pure devotees. The unfortunate Brahmana of Harinadi and the learned 
Pandits assembled there could not understand the necessity or propriety of 
chanting the Name of Hari with a loud voice because they were satisfied with 
their individual mental outlooks and speculative opinions regarding the teaching 
of the Scriptures, although the same Scriptures are never tired of warning 
their readers against committing the offense of confounding the spiritual with 
the physical or mental issue. Those learned Pandits had found the untruth 
which they were seeking in their lives by precept and example. No sincere 
seeker of the Truth should, however, allow himself to be deliberately committed 
to views regarding the worship of Godhead for the purpose of thereby ensuring 
his own superiority over his fellowmen. Those pseudo-Brahmanas were too fond 
of the social superiority of their hereditary position to be inclined to pay heed to 
the real meaning of the Scriptures which is so utterly incompatible with the 
social privileges, which they so unworthily monopolized. It is seldom that 
the prosperous and confirmed thief is inclined to pay serious attention to 
the counsels of stainless honesty. 



Chapter 22 Pilgrimage to Gaya and Initiation 


Nimai Pandit continued to teach His students in Nabadwip after His Marriage 
with Sree Vishnupriya Devi. The Lord was leading the ideal life of 
the householder Brahmana up to this point of our Narrative. It was the life that 
is enjoined by the Dharma-Shastras for those who want to lead a life that is 
not opposed to spiritual well-being. But it is not itself the spiritual life The life 
of the Brahmana is the model for the other classes of the worldly people. It 
places before us the necessity of not putting one’s trust exclusively in the so- 
called good things of this world. If one has to live in this world, as one must till 
he finds it really necessary to change his worldly life for one that is higher, 
he should constantly keep before him the purpose underlying the life of 
the Brahmana as laid down in the Scriptures. 

It does not mean that every one should embrace the calling of the teacher of 
religion nor that everyone should marry. So long as a person feels any affinity 
for the activities of this world he should learn a calling that is to his taste and 
follow the same. Those, who feel a taste for the work of a teacher, have also to 
qualify themselves for the same by adopting a life that is in keeping with the 
proper discharge of the responsibilities of that particular worldly calling. The 
teacher of the people must in the first place lead a life that is in conformity with 
the interests of his pupils. The highest of all interests is knowledge of the 
Brahman. One, who is devoid of the knowledge of the Brahman is debarred by 
this radical disqualification from taking charge of the education of the people. 

It is not the purpose of the Scriptures to prevent the proper cultivation of any 
branch of knowledge by thus making the Brahmana the sole custodian of 
the education of the people. The arrangement recommended by the Shastras 
does not recognise the competence of any secular knowledge to free us from 
the fetters of ignorance, and is, therefore, unwilling to recognise the cultivation 
of such knowledge for its own sake, and is opposed to the purely 
secular education which they do not consider to be beneficial or even 
harmless pastime. All persons, even those who are engaged in secular pursuits, 
must possess the spiritual outlook to be enabled to function properly even in 
those pursuits. The superiority and desideratum of spiritual living in 
its unadulterated purity must be recognized by being practically imposed on 
all social institutions. 



It must, however, be borne in mind that it is not to a sacerdotal, hereditary caste 
that the Scriptures intend to bestow the lucrative privilege of the monopoly of a 
trade of educating the people. Any person, who possesses the genuine 
disposition to seek for the Truth and who prefers the quest of the Truth to every 
other consideration, to whatever class of the society he may belong by birth, is to 
be recognized as a Brahmana who is fit for this purely spiritual purpose for its 
own sake. It does not appear that the Scriptures, by means of the Varnasrama 
organization, sought to prevent the free choice of secular occupation by 
individuals. As a matter of fact the object of the institution is just the opposite of 
this. It requires every individual to be put into the profession that best suits his 
natural aptitude and to do this at the proper early age. But it also recognized a 
natural graduation of classes. It considers the position of the spiritual teacher of 
society as superior to that of all the others. Next below the spiritual teachers it 
puts the spiritually guided ruling class. Those, who are the leaders of the 
economic pursuits under spiritual direction, come next below the political body. 
The fourth estate consists of those who are devoid of spiritual inclination but are 
prepared to earn a living by loyally serving others who are spiritually disposed. 

The peculiarity of the arrangement is that it puts the spiritually enlightened 
teaching class, carefully recruited from all the classes, at the head of the 
society, not in the political, nor in the economic, but in the purely spiritual sense. 
If a Brahmana meddles in politics or trade or service, he automatically loses 
his status as a teacher. As a teacher the Brahmana is to be maintained by the 
free gifts of the community to be obtained, not by political pressure but, by 
begging by the teachers themselves, or their students on their behalf. It is 
incumbent on the Brahmana not to amass any wealth but to devote all surplus 
wealth which may come into his hands in the way that is spiritually beneficial 
for the society. 

In other words the Brahmana lives for the purpose of finding the Truth in order 
to serve Him when found. His life is the probationary stage of spiritual 
living. The practical result of this obligation, on the part of the teacher, of 
leading the theistic life enjoined by the Scriptures, would not be objectionable as 
long as the process of recruitment remains inefficient. The Scriptures provide 
that an unworthy teacher should forfeit his position as a matter of course. The 
function of degrading such a person belongs to the body of the Brahmanas. We 
find that the privilege was misunderstood and grossly abused in actual practice. 
But it would be difficult to suggest that the system itself is, therefore a defective 
one. 



If any society wants to be guided by the instruction of unworthy persons it is 
always free to do so and to be ruined by choosing to do so. The 
Varnasrama institution is a secular organization and as such shares the 
unavoidable defects of all such institutions. It is claimed to be the only 
organization that has been scientifically conceived for the promotion of spiritual 
living. Unless this is borne in mind it would be difficult to understand what 
follows. 

We have seen that Sree Gaursundar had been leading the life of the ideal 
Brahmana householder up till now. The actual mode of life that He led 
has already been described in different ways. The successful endeavour to live 
the life of a Brahmana was now to be rewarded by the attainment of 
spiritual enlightenment which is the goal to which it is directed. 

This is the secondary aspect of the event that we are now going to narrate. The 
Supreme Lord was induced to manifest His Appearance in this world by 
being moved to Pity by the sufferings of His devotees. The Iron Age proved too 
bad to be redeemed by the exertions of His agents. Even Sree Advaita acharyya, 
Who is the cause of the Appearance of the Lord, had been set at naught by the 
stubborn atheists of Nabadwip, despite the universal respect in which he was 
personally held in all the learned circles and among those Brahmanas who 
occupied the highest social position. In spite of the personal exertions of Advaita 
and ah the devotees who were resident at Nabadwip there was perceptible no 
change for the better in the attitude of the people towards the Vaishnavas. On the 
contrary their hostility to the Vaishnavas continued to increase and at last 
became intolerable. The denunciation of the Vaishnavas by those bad people 
became the constant and fashionable pastime of the day. The devotees felt the 
greatest sorrow on beholding the prevalence of such universal preference for 
false worldly pleasures on the part of the people. The very name of devotion 
was banned from the category of topics worthy of their serious discussion. 
Vishnu and the Vaishnavas were, however, constantly reviled by one and ah. All 
this was happening at Nabadwip under the eyes of the Lord Himself Who was 
all the time absorbed in scholastic pursuits. The grief of His devotees at last 
moved the Lord to compassion and made Him manifest His Activity of the 
Savior. 

But before the Supreme Lord openly ranged Himself on the side of His devotees 
He wished to visit the holy Tirtha of Gaya. For the ostensible purpose 
of performing the due funeral rites in honour of His deported father the Lord 



set out for Gaya with many of His disciples. With a mind full of great delight the 
Lord took leave of His mother and obtained her permission for the journey to 
Gaya. The holy feet of the Lord then began their triumphal progress 
towards Gaya, sanctifying all the country and the villages wherein the people 
dwelt, turning them into the holiest of tirthas. 

The Lord journeyed in the company of His numerous followers in the pleasure 
of delightful talk on all manner of topics ranging from religion to gossip 
and hilarious laughter and jocoseness. Traveling for days in this fashion the 
Lord reached Mandara and after beholding Sree Madhusudan, Who is 
worshipped there, roamed over the Hill to please Himself. But in a few days 
after the resumption of His journey the Lord manifested the Leela of falling ill 
by an attack of fever. The Lord was to all appearance smitten with fever, like 
ordinary men, on His way in the middle of the journey. This filled the hearts of 
His disciples with great anxiety. They halted on their way and made every effort 
for having Him cured of the distemper. But the fever obstinately refused to 
be healed, such being the Will of the Lord. At last the Lord prescribed the 
proper medicine for Himself, declaring that drinking the water that had been 
used in washing the feet of a Brahmana relieves from all suffering., In order to 
vindicate the greatness of the feet wash of Brahmanas the Supreme Lord drank 
the same Himself in the view of all the people. As soon as He had drunk the feet- 
wash of the Brahmanas the Supreme Lord was instantly restored to the healthy 
state and the fever left for good. 

Thakur Brindavandas, commenting on the above, says that the Veda and the 
Puranas bear testimony to the fact that it is the nature of Godhead to drink 
the feet wash of Brahmanas and quotes the following from the Geeta. ‘I serve 
every one in the way that he submits to Me. Men, O Partha, follow in all cases 
the lead of My Service .’ 

The service of Krishna is performed by all the activities of men. All methods of 
activity come under the category of the service of the Indivisible 
Knowledge Who is identical with Krishna. If it be asked what constitutes the 
basic difference between the methods of fruitive activity, seeking to merge in 
the undifferentiated Brahman, and the path of devotion (the only possible modes 
of activity open to the individual soul) the answer is that the last is the model 
for the rest. Every one seeks to follow his own inner conviction and light. 

In proportion as the light within is actually followed it also gives the 
proper guidance. To one, who chooses to follow the inner guidance only 



partially, the Light offers only a proportionately partial view of Himself. One, 
who chooses to neglect Him, is offered a correspondingly deluding view of the 
Truth and one which he finds more in accordance with his choice. But the Light, 
Whom all men serve in different ways, is always the same indivisible knowledge 
dealing with His votaries in the way that His votaries choose to deal by Him. 

The difference is, therefore, due to the degree of submission to the 
indivisible knowledge that is actually offered by the individual soul. The 
doctrine of rebellion against Godhead, to explain the origin of sin, is true only in 
the above sense. 

Krishna is found and served only by those who offer their full submission to the 
Indivisible Truth. When one offers less than his full submission to Krishna he no 
longer sees Krishna as He is but in an eclipsed form of the Truth corresponding 
to his own imperfect homage to Him. Indra is also Krishna but only as viewed 
by the worshipper who covets the pleasure of paradise. Every object of worship 
to be found in the different creeds, which is offered less than the whole service, 
is also Krishna in His secondary, z.e., deluding, forms. When the object of 
worship is not Krishna, or is an eclipsed view of Krishna, the Indivisible 
Knowledge does not show Himself to the worshipper who experiences in 
consequence all those difficulties that beset the path of those who do not worship 
Krishna as He is. 

Sree Gaursundar exhibited the pastime of drinking the feet-wash of Brahmanas 
and not of non-Brahmanas to signify that Krishna fulfills all requirements of 
the soul who throws himself wholly on His protection, but He does not deal in 
the same way with those who are not disposed to serve Him. He is not disposed 
to accept the service of those who are not disposed to offer Him their 
wholehearted service. But He keeps back nothing from His devotee; nay, He 
uses all his power in vindicating the preeminence of His devotees over those 
who are not disposed to serve Him fully. 

Thakur Brindavandas goes so far as to assert that the Lord serves those who seek 
to serve Him in every way by their whole attitude and at all time. The Lord is the 
servant of His servant. He is subdued by His servant. This is in keeping with 
what has been stated above. In the battle of Kurukshetra Krishna was compelled 
by Bhishma to take up arms, thereby breaking His own promise to observe 
absolute neutrality during the conflict, which had led Duryodhana to prefer to 
accept the help of Krishna’s army to Krishna’s own Person pledged not to fight 
by actually using His weapons against any party. Bhishma did not consider this 



policy of Duryodhana, on whose side he had to fight against his own better 
judgment, to be at all wise; and he told Duryodhana that Krishna was bound to 
break His promise if He found the Pandavas in real danger. Bhishma was 
confident of proving his contention as he knew that without the active help of 
Krishna no one could prevail against any one. Krishna could, of course, have 
easily made the Pandavas prevail over Bhishma without openly breaking His 
promise or neutrality; but He preferred to be vanquished on this point in order to 
glorify both Bhishma and Arjuna who were His devotees. Krishna is thus proved 
to be always ready to obey the wish of His devotee even when it seems to run 
counter to His Own. There are numerous instances of this kind of Conduct on 
the part of Godhead in the Puranas when He allows Himself to be vanquished by 
His devotee whenever He is seriously opposed by the latter. 

I am perfectly aware that there are persons who have grossly misinterpreted the 
Shloka of the Geeta, quoted above by Thakur Brindavandas, and also 
the conduct of Sree Gaursundar on this occasion: There is a body of opinion 
among a section of the commentators of the scriptures who are inclined to 
exploit the passages in the Scriptures expressing the superiority of the 
Brahmanas into an argument in favour of the unconditional predominance of the 
hereditary caste of Brahmanas over everything including the Divinity Himself. 
Sree Gaursundar as well as Sree Krishna are held by these commentators to be 
upholders of the social and spiritual superiority of the hereditary Brahmana 
caste. The point is pushed to the promulgation of the view that those worshippers 
of Krishna, who are not born in the Brahmana caste, are rendered inferior to the 
caste Brahmanas by their not being born in Brahmana families. 

This ridiculous interpretation of the particular passages of the Scriptures, of 
which an instance is given above, is so obviously sectarian and so 
utterly opposed to the contexts in which they appear that there should remain at 
this point of the Narrative no ground for such silly misunderstanding on the part 
of those readers who are not pledged to shut their eyes to the Truth out 
of deference to narrow individual or class prejudices. The true Brahmana 
is certainly deserving of universal respect by reason of his disposition for 
the unconditional service of the Truth. But no one is a Brahmana who does 
not serve the Truth in this unreserved manner. The Truth is identical with 
Vishnu. A Brahmana, who does not serve Vishnu, is worse than a Chandala 
whose very sight is to be avoided by all persons. Therefore, it is not the birth that 
makes the Brahmana in the sense in which he is to be regarded as the servant of 
Vishnu. It is the test of complete submission to Vishnu that is the only 



consideration. The distinction between one person and another is due to the 
measure in which he is disposed to serve not a fancy of his erring mind under the 
name of Truth but the Truth Himself, Who is no other than Vishnu. If one does 
not serve Vishnu, z.e., Godhead as He really is, he cannot claim the homage of 
society by reason of his birth in a Brahmana family. The community of genuine 
Brahmanas would also necessarily repudiate all claims of their own social 
superiority independently of the reference to the service of Vishnu which is the 
one thing needful and is admitted as such in practice by the Brahmanas who 
follow this real interpretation of the Scriptures and who are recruited from 
among all classes of the people by this sole text. 

The doctrine, that requires unconditional submission to the feet of Godhead, 
does not entail any curtailment of our individual liberty to serve the Truth in the 
way we choose. There is no loss of scope or diversity on the plane of complete 
submission, but only an increase in the degree and outlook of the faculty of 
cognition. The very same act is viewed differently from different angles of 
vision even on the plane of the Absolute, but without causing any loss of 
Harmony. On the mundane plane there are also the same different angles 
of vision but they conflict with one another and produce only a temporary 
and unwholesome result by their diversity. The game is not worth the candle in 
the latter case. 

A person, who is located on the mundane plane, commits the fatal error of 
looking at everything from a point of view that is not really his own. This 
real abandonment of his individuality is wrongly supposed, by mere force of 
habit, as constituting his proper individual point of view. In this case there is not 
only a disadvantageous angle of vision, from which the Truth cannot be 
properly seen, but also a resolve not to see the Truth. Truth can be seen only by 
the serving disposition. If I choose to look at the Truth from the point of view 
of the master I am left by the process without any ground to stand upon. This 
is so because the Truth does not serve anyone except Himself. If I choose to 
look at Truth from the point of view of the master and choose to call ,this as 
my individual angle of vision for viewing the Truth, I thereby commit the 
offense of suppressio veri inasmuch as my real intention, in taking up the 
impossible point of view, is not to see the Truth at all but only a particular 
hypothetical entity or non-Truth that is made to appear to my view by my own 
manipulation to miss the sight of the Truth. 


The protection of Godhead in all circumstances is realizable as the basic 



condition of all rational activity on the part of the individual soul. The 
devotee is, therefore, under no temptation of seeking to disown the Refuge of the 
lotus feet of Krishna, even if such ambition be permitted a seeming scope by 
the absolute master Himself. The devotee is spontaneously and exclusively 
attached to the feet of Krishna not by the need of the preservation of his 
rational consistency of conduct but by the innate impulse of love. The devotee 
seeks the protection of the Lord for the satisfaction of the causeless loving 
hankering of his pure nature for the service of the all-beautiful who is also all¬ 
knowledge and all-existence, there is therefore, no plea which need be availed by 
him for seeking to disown the protection of the Lord. 

After displaying the pastime of getting cured of the manifestation of fever, the 
Lord made His way to the holy Tirtha of Poonapoona. Having bathed 
and worshipped the Pitris (Manes), the Son of Sree Sachi entered Gaya. The 
Lord, joining His beautiful hands, made obeisance to holy Gaya on entering 
the sacred tirtha, being overcome with spiritual fervor. He then proceeded 
to Brahmakunda and, after bathing in its holy water duly honoured the Pitris. 

Thence He came to Chakrabera and made haste to have the sight of the lotus feet 
of Sree Gadadhara. 

The Lord found that the holy site of the lotus feet was surrounded by the 
Brahmanas. The garlands, offered to the lotus feet, had accumulated to the height 
of a temple. The offering made of perfume, flower, incense, lighted 
lamp, clothing, ornament, was beyond all calculation. The Brahmanas, wearing 
the beauty of celestials and attending on all sides, were engaged in reciting 
the power of the lotus feet. “Ye most fortunate people, behold those feet that 
are clasped to his bosom by the lord of Kashi, that are ever the life of Lakshmi, 
that make themselves manifest on the head of Bali. Behold all ye those feet by 
whose momentary meditation one ceases to be subject to the god of death 
(Yama). Behold, all ye fortunate people, the self-same feet that are so rarely 
attainable to the highest yogis, those feet in whom the sanctifying Bhagirathy 
makes her appearance whom the devotee never parts from his heart. Fortunate 
people, behold those dearly beloved feet that repose on the couch of Sree 
Ananta.” 

On hearing of the power of those feet from the lips of the Brahmanas the Lord 
was overwhelmed by transcendental bliss. His two lotus eyes overflowed 
with tears. At the sight of the divine feet His person was decked with 



horripilation and shivering. So did Lord Gaurachandra, for the good fortune of 
all the worlds, begin the manifestation of loving devotion. The never ceasing 
Ganges flowed in the eyes of the Lord. All the Brahmanas beheld the wonderful 
sight. 

I have tried to preserve the actual words of Thakur Brindavandas in describing 
the incident that first excited the manifestation of loving devotion by 
Sree Gaursundar. 

This is the turning point in the Career of the Lord. From this point onwards the 
Lord appears as the ideal devotee of Godhead. The change to spiritual life 
when it does come to the Brahmana householder, comes in the form of the 
undeserved causeless mercy of Godhead. The mercy of Godhead is indescribable 
to one who has not been the recipient of the same. Had it been describable in 
terms of worldly experience it would have been more or less deserved. 

Those, who seek to understand the spiritual life in terms of mundane values, 
contradict themselves when they assert with the same breath that Godhead is the 
judge of right and wrong and is the Dispenser of reward for righteous conduct. If 
the spiritual enlightenment is a gift for righteous living preceding the gift, can it 
also be described as causeless or undeserved? Those, who insist that the value of 
the spiritual life should be intelligible to a person before he accepts it, in order 
that he may make his choice in the rational way, only commit the mistake of 
begging the question. If, on the other hand, the value of the spiritual life be 
admitted on trust without any previous knowledge of its nature, it would be 
liable to be justly condemned as ‘blind faith’ that has proved the fruitful source 
of all the patent corruptions to be found in all parts of the world and which are 
cherished by their victims under the terrible self-delusion that they only appear 
to be bad by reason of their very transcendental nature. The sight of Vishnu’s 
feet at Gaya gave Sree Gaursundar His first spiritual experience as devotee. The 
sight of the feet of the Lord is not available to any one except by the mercy of 
the Lord. Why the Lord is merciful to a person, can never be known. The 
Supreme Lord is full of mercy and makes no distinction in bestowing His favour 
in boundless measure on all persons. But there is also a process of receiving His 
favour which depends on the free choice of the recipient of the divine favour. As 
soon as this condition is fulfilled by the recipient, he is rewarded with the sight 
of the feet of the Lord. 


If it be contended that a gift, which is conditional on the recipient fulfilling any 



requirement, cannot be described as either causeless or undeserved, the 
answer would be that the particular gift fulfills all these contradictory conditions. 
The gift remains causeless although it is bestowed only on those who fulfill 
the conditions necessary for qualifying for receiving it. The sole condition is 
the desire, which is also causeless, of serving the Truth when found. This 
attitude may be called blind faith so long as the Truth is yet unfound. But the 
Truth reveals Himself only to His sincere seeker. There is no cause why He 
should do so; but, as a matter of fact, He does so. It is the nature of Truth to do 
so. 

If hydrogen and oxygen combine to form water we are satisfied that we 
understand how water is formed. If it be asked why the two gases should 
be transformed into water at all, which is altogether a different substance, we 
are only offered further information on the process itself by way of explanation. 
We are also not dissatisfied when we get such explanation. This is so because 
we understand that it is our business not to question the tmth of the operations 
of nature because they are of the nature of facts which exist independently of 
our speculations regarding them. We are naturally enough only anxious to 
know more about the actual process of the working of the different forces of 
nature. The question of ‘Why’ this should be so, z'.e., the ethical issue does not 
arise at all, in regard to these ‘blind’ operations of nature. 

But when we are asked to accept the spiritual ‘fact’ that the sight of the feet of 
Hari is capable of producing the disposition for serving the Lord we are at 
once impelled to bring up the ethical question why this should be so. In regard 
to such attitude, however, it is important to bear in mind that the ethical 
question itself is always relative to a standard. That standard is the unknown 
quantity. The empiricists have been trying in vain to discover the real standard of 
the ethical instinct. All speculative standards, as yet discovered in terms 
of mundane values, have proved more or less unsatisfactory and wide of the 
mark. The only useful purpose, that those speculations have served, is to expose 
the utter futility of finding the ethical standard by the method of such 
speculation. 

The fun is that this admitted failure notwithstanding the exponents of the so- 
called science of ethics do not hesitate to lay down detailed instructions for the 
guidance of those who are desirous of leading the ethical life. The disciples 
of this imperfect science are also in their turn never tired of bragging 
their superiority (?) over those who are not acquainted with the conclusions 



(not errors) of their favorite science of moral (?) conduct. A certain type of 
admirers of Christianity are especially fond of trying to prove this kind of moral 
(?) superiority of the Christian religion over other creeds of the world. But if 
they are held tightly to the meaning of their words they can escape only under 
the cover of transparent prevarications and by dint of the dense understanding 
or contemptuous indifference of their opponents. 

It is not our purpose to deny the value of the ethical instinct; but we are sworn 
foes of the hollow pretensions of the so-called empiric science of ethics 
which has such disastrous effect on the morals of some of its votaries. It makes 
them insuperably self-conceited ‘without rhyme or reason’. Godhead is no doubt 
the Source of all righteousness but certainly not of the brand that is 
manufactured by the science of empiric ethics. That science will be found on 
examination to be opposed to the real ethical issue by its presumption of being 
able to explain all ethical value by the superficial analysis of the external 
activities in which the ethical principle seeks to express itself. The method is that 
of shunting off the real issue to the side track and getting up a case in favour of 
its unworthy proxy on the evidence of non-essential adventitious circumstances. 

We appeal to the experience of all that no person had ever been helped to 
become more ethical by the mere study of the empiric ethical science, nor 
has any person been ever really satisfied that the science has been able to throw 
any light on the nature of the principle that really matters. It has, on the 
contrary, only offered destructive criticism of the only really ethical conduct on 
the irrelevant ground of the defective circumstances under which it manifests 
itself in this world. 

It’s really the immaculate soul who expresses his dissatisfaction of meaningless 
unnatural sensuous existence, in the form of the ethical protest. The soul cannot 
be satisfied by any values offered by our mundane experience or hopes of 
mundane improvement. He believes instinctively in an existence which is wholly 
free from all these defects and is impelled by his innate nature to seek to realize 
the conditions of such existence. It is the question of function and plane, about 
which the empiricist is so unduly skeptical. The function of the soul on the 
mundane plane is directed, is bound unaccountably to be directed, towards only 
mundane objects. The mundane objective is also, in its turn the cause of the 
degeneration of the function. The organs, through which the soul functions 
towards the mundane objective, share in the defects of the objective and are as 
unavoidable causes of degeneracy as the objective itself. This is the only ethical 



problem. 


The ethical instinct is thus co-related with the quest for the Truth, not the 
speculative truth which sets its heart on a radically glorified sensuous 
existence but the Absolute Truth to Whom the present muddy understanding, 
with its natural preference for the dirt, has no access and which is not even 
privileged to suspect that it is itself so far away from the direction of the Truth. 
This introduces the all-important factor of the plane. The ethical life is capable 
of being substantively realized, in a form that is perfectly unintelligible to 
our present understanding, only on the plane of the Absolute, to which our 
present faculties have no access. 

This brings us to the necessity of divine grace for being relieved of our mundane 
equipments. Until this point of view has been reached by the discontented soul 
by the force of his earthly disillusionments, he is not in a position to lend his ear 
to the message regarding the proper nature of the spiritual function and the only 
method of its attainment. A person, who has arrived at this stage, should be in a 
position to recognize the manifestation of divine mercy in aid of the seeker of 
the Truth. The Archa is such divine Manifestation. The feet of the Lord, 
worshipped at Gaya, are really the feet of the Lord Himself and may be seen as 
such only by the most fortunate people who have been convinced of the utter 
worthlessness of the promised improvement of this temporary worldly existence 
by speculative methods and have been thereby led to put their trust, not blindly 
but in all true rational humility, in divine aid appearing in a form that is also 
accessible to our present defective equipments. To such a person the Archa of the 
feet of the Lord at Gaya manifests His divine nature. 

The actual service of Godhead is barred to empiricists by reason of their 
stubborn disbelief in the divinity of the Archa. An aspect of the 
Protestant movement in Christianity and the religion of Mohammed as 
expounded by certain schools of his followers, inculcate doctrines akin to those 
of the school of the worshippers (?) of the undifferentiated Brahman in this 
country. The element of error in such attitude consists in the fact that it seems to 
imply the wrong assumption that it is possible to rise to the conception of the 
nature of Godhead in a way that is also explicable to mundane judgment. The 
descent of 

Godhead is not, therefore, fully admitted. Once the empiric ambition of our 
capacity to work up to Godhead is properly discarded the deluded form 



of iconoclastic fury should appear to be itself subject to the delusion which 
it claims to condemn with such otherwise laudable vehemence. The 
iconoclasm of the rabid iconoclast must be carefully avoided by the cultivation 
of the true patience of judgment if one is to earn the privilege of recognizing the 
descent of Godhead in the Archa. Those, who are unfit to worship the Archa, are 
still less qualified for the higher form of confidential worship of the Holy Name 
by the methods of kirtana and recollection. 

The mercy of Godhead is recognizable by His influence on the disposition of His 
recipient. As soon as Godhead wills to show Himself to the fettered soul, 

He does so by directing the latter to seek the guidance of His devotee. This 
involves two things. The person favoured by Godhead is enabled to recognize 
the devotee and is also enabled to be convinced of the necessity of submitting to 
his unconditional guidance. If this result is not produced we should suppose 
that the person has not really received the divine favour but has only been 
deceived by his own disloyal imagination. 

As Sree Gaursundar was in the act of exhibiting those spiritual perturbations that 
were produced by hearing the praise of the holy feet of Sree Gadadhara from the 
lips of the Brahmanas. 

Sree Iswara Puri appeared on the spot, apparently by mere accident, but really by 
the Will of Godhead. On catching sight of Sree Iswara Puri Sree 
Gaursundar made obeisance to him with an exhibition of His most cordial 
regard. Iswara Puri also on his part, on seeing Gaurachandra, embraced Him 
with great delight. The holy forms of both were drenched with the tears of both 
by the force of the experience of spiritual joy. 

The Lord said, “My pilgrimage to Gaya has born fruit only now inasmuch as I 
have obtained the sight of your feet. By offering the pinda at Gaya only the 
pitris are saved from their sufferings. Even so it is only the particular person, 
to whom the pinda is offered that is saved thereby. By the sight of you crores 
of the groups of the pitris are instantly set free from all their fetters. Therefore, 
the tirtha itself is not the equal of you, You are the highest of tirthas and the best 
of all blessings. Vouchsafe to deliver Me from the ocean of this worldly sojourn. 

I surrender My Person to you, now and here. May you be pleased to make 
Me drink of the nectarine juice of the lotus feet of Krishna. This is the gift that 
I pray for”. Iswara Puri replied, “Listen, Pandit, I now know as certain that 
Thou art divine portion of the Iswara Himself. Are scholarship and goodness, 



that are Thine, possible in one who is not the Portion of the Divinity? I have had 
an auspicious dream of this truth this very day. I have now obtained the fruit of 
it in this tangible form. I tell Thee truly, Pandit. At the sight of Thee I 
experience the transcendental bliss at all time. Ever since I beheld Thee at Nadia 
nothing else has had any attraction for my heart. This is the bare truth I am 
telling Thee. There is nothing else in it but the truth. I obtain the bliss of 
beholding Krishna by seeing Thee.” 

On hearing the true words of His beloved Iswara Puri the Lord said laughingly, 

“I am, indeed, most fortunate.” This was followed by a good deal of mutual 
talk in which both joined with alacrity. Thakur Brindavandas does not attempt 
to record the same, remarking that the task will be performed in future by 
Sree Vedavyasa. Having greeted Sree Iswara Puri in this manner the Lord, 
after begging and obtaining his permission, applied Himself to the performance 
of the funeral rites that are enjoined by the Scriptures on the pious pilgrim on 
his arrival at the tirtha. 

The Lord now performed the rite of offering the pinda on the sand and went to 
the hill-top of Preta-Gaya. Having performed the rite of loyal homage 
(Sraddha) at Preta-Gaya the Son of Sree Sachi gratified the Brahmanas by gifts 
and sweet words. Having thus delivered and pleased the pitris the Lord 
proceeded to Dakshina Manasa with a glad Heart. The Lord next visited Sree 
Rama-Gaya where He had performed the sraddha when He Appeared in this 
world as Sree Ramachandra. After performing the same ceremony at the place in 
this Avatara also, Sree Gaur-Hari went from there to Judhisthira-Gaya where 
Judhisthira had offered the pinda in old times. Lord Gaurarai now exhibited the 
Leela of performing the same ceremony at this place in loving remembrance of 
that event. The Brahmanas, attending on all sides of the Lord, made Him 
perform the sraddha and made the Lord repeat their words. As the Lord threw 
the pinda into the water on the conclusion of the ceremony, the priestly 
Brahmanas of 

Gaya caught up and swallowed the same. The Lord laughed as He saw this 
performance. All the worldly fetters of those Brahmanas were canceled. 

After offering the pinda at Uttara Manasa Gauranga Sree Hari performed the 
rites of Bhima Gaya. The Lord duly performed all the customary ceremonies at 
Siva-Gaya, Brahma-Gaya and all the other places and at last went up to 
Shorasha-Gaya. Having performed the Shorashi at Shorasha-Gaya, the Lord 
offered the pinda to all, with all due regard. Then, after bathing in the Brahma 



Kunda, the Supreme Lord came up to the Head of Gaya and offered the pinda 
there. Taking up the excellent garlands and sandal-paste with His own beautiful 
hands, the Lord worshipped the Print of the feet of Vishnu with great joy. Having 
thus performed the sraddha at all the different places, the Lord returned to 
His lodgings after satisfying the Brahmanas with gifts. 

After refreshing Himself by a short rest, the Lord began to cook His meal. Just 
as He had finished cooking the great Sree Iswara Puri arrived there. In the act 
of reciting the Name of Krishna by the process of loving devotion Puri came 
with tottering steps to where the Lord was preparing His meal. The Lord 
desisted from cooking as soon as He caught sight of Puri and, with the 
greatest reverence, after making His obeisance, offered him the best seat and 
made him seated. 

Puri said laughingly, “Listen Pandit, I find that it is in very good time indeed that 
I chance to arrive !” The Lord replied, “As the good fortune has 
manifested itself, may your reverence accept the alms of this cooked food to¬ 
day.,” As this request was pressed by the Lord Puri laughed as he said, “What 
wilt Thou have?, The Lord replied, “I will cook again, just now”. Puri demurred, 
“What is the use of cooking again? Divide the cooked food into two halves.” 

The Lord could not help smiling as He said, “If, indeed, you want to have Me at 
all, accept all the food that has been cooked. I will cook afresh, in a very short 
time. Be pleased not to hesitate, but do accept this alms.” 

Thereupon the Lord, making over His own food to Puri, applied to cook for 
Himself once again with a joyful Heart. Great, indeed, is the mercy of the 
Lord to Sree Iswara Puri. Puri also on his part had no other inclination save 
towards Krishna. The Lord served the meal with His own beautiful hands. Puri 
ate in the state of transcendent bliss. At that very moment Ramadevi 
Herself, unobserved by any one, with the greatest secrecy, cooked the food for 
the Lord in no time. After having made Puri accept the alms of food, the Lord 
ate His meal with a glad heart. Those, concludes Thakur Brindavandas, who 
listen to this Narrative of the dining of the Lord in the company of Iswara Puri, 
gain the treasure of the love of Krishna. 

After finishing His meal, the Lord, with His own holy hands, applied excellent 
perfumes to all parts of the person of Sree Iswara Puri. The tenderness of 
the love of the Lord for Iswara Puri passes the power of description of all 
persons. Lord Sree Chaitanya, who is Godhead Himself, undertook pilgrimage to 



the birth place of Sree Iswara Puri. Arrived at the place, the Lord greeted it with 
His fervent affection. “I make My obeisance,” said He, “to Sree Kumarahatta, 
the blessed village in which Sree Iswara Puri made his appearance in this 
world.” Chaitanya wept long at the sight of the place, and could not articulate 
any other sound except ‘Iswara Puri’. The Lord took the earth from the spot and, 
tying it in His own outer-cloth brought it with Him. “This is the birth-place of 
Iswara Puri” said the Lord, “This earth is my heart’s love, my treasure, my life.” 
With such intensity does the Lord love Sree Iswara Puri. The Supreme Lord, 
indeed, wields all His power to glorify His devotee. The Lord said, “That I came 
to Gaya on pilgrimage, has been proved to be true, as I have obtained the sight of 
Iswara Puri.” 

On the following day the Lord went to Sree Iswara Puri alone by Himself and 
implored from him, with sweet words, the favour of initiation (diksha) by 
the mantra. Puri said, “It is a small matter to bestow the mantra. I can by all 
means give Thee my life.” Thereupon, Narayana, Teacher-Guru of the world, 
accepted the ten-lettered mantra from him. Then the Lord after 
circumambulating Puri said to him, “I surrender My Person to you. May you 
bend your auspicious glance on Me that I may float in the ocean of the love of 
Krishna.” On hearing these words of the Lord Sree Iswara Puri bestowed his 
embrace on Sree Gaursundar by clasping Him to his bosom. The Forms of Both 
were drenched with the tears of Both by love, and Neither could remain 
unmoved. 

The question of unconditional submission to the spiritual guide has a close 
connection with that of ritual in general. Those, who are on principle averse 
to ritualistic observance in any form, are also necessarily disinclined to express 
in any formal way their decision to submit to the direction of the spiritual 
guide. They are disposed to make a distinction between the external act and 
the internal motive prompting the same and to hold the former as superfluous 
and unnecessary. This will appear to be an untenable attitude inasmuch as just 
to the extent that one’s own differing judgment is asserted in the method 
and motive of offering one’s submission, the submission, that is so offered, 
is rendered conditional and imperfect. Such protest is, therefore, really 
made against the principle of unconditional submission itself. 

The point, that has to be borne in mind, is that the submission in this case is 

offered to the Supreme Lord Himself. If the Guru is supposed to be less 

than divine, less than the Truth Himself, the disposition, that holds back the offer 



of unconditional submission from such an entity, is both rational and 
perfectly justifiable. No one is under any obligation to offer his submission to 
the nonTruth. From this point of view the offer of partial submission to anything 
or to any person can be only a hypocritical show of submission against one’s 
own conviction. The Truth is Truth. Adulterated Truth is contradiction in 
terms. Adulterated truth is untruth that tries to pass itself off as truth on this 
mundane plane of self-deceived delusions. 

In this world no one is anxious to serve, but every one is anxious to be served. 
Service is, therefore, rendered in the expectation of a return in service 
greater than what is offered, by the estimation of the recipient of service. He 
who renders service is actuated by this deliberate desire to deceive the recipient 
of such service. This is the principle of hypocrisy. Expectation of greater 
service from others, is the antithesis of the bona fide impulse of service. One, 
who really offers service, does so without expectation of return, in any form, in 
exchange of the service that is offered. If the servant is critical, he is critical only 
to be on his guard against any reservation on his part. He is only anxious to 
render the complete service. He is anxious to be satisfied that there is no 
lurking reservation in this matter in any obscure corner of his heart. He is 
anxious to study the nature of the demand that is made upon him by his master. 
He is not disposed to criticize the motive or method of the master making the 
demand. The servant must not suppose himself to be a better judge of the 
requirement of his master than the Master Himself. If he thinks he should be 
allowed to judge as to how the master should be served, he steps into the place 
of the master and makes his real Master serve the pleasure of His hypocritical 
servant. This would be the reversion of the natural process. 

The show of opposition, that is made by the really loyal servant to the Master’s 
wishes, should not be confounded with the desire of the disloyal servant 
to thwart the master for reasons of his own convenience. The demarcating line 
is, no doubt, an extremely fine one and is likely to be missed by those who 
have not a very clean heart. But there is all the difference between the 
seeming opposition of the loyal servant and the disloyal attempts of the 
mercenary selfseeker, that distinguishes the genuine gold from the treacherous 
counterfeit. The latter of course tries to mask his disloyal motive under the 
profession of an over-strained solicitude for the Master's interest. This only 
makes his conduct more hideous and ungrateful. The objectionable principle, 
underlying the latter form of conduct, is called hypocrisy. The loyal servant is 
free from all taint of hypocrisy. He may commit mistakes in judging the Master's 



wishes, but he is always and fully anxious to understand and serve the wishes of 
his Master. Any seeming opposition of his to his Master's wishes, even when his 
judgment is wrong, also expresses his single-hearted devotion to his Master's 
interests. 

The mischief is that the conditioned soul has got also other interests besides the 
service of the Truth. The conditioned soul is prepared, in every case, to offer this 
mixed form of service to Godhead: the disloyal servant also is prepared to serve 
his Master to a varying extent. It is seldom that the disloyal servant is prepared 
to openly defy his Master in every act. But even when the disloyal servant 
happens to agree to serve his Master, he does so for the ultimate purpose of 
serving only himself thereby. The hypocrite throws off the mask as soon as he is 
safe to disobey his Master without the risk of jeopardizing his interests, or when 
his own interests are best promoted by open disobedience. In the case of the 
loyal servant the Master's difficulties only serve to vindicate the genuineness of 
his loyal disposition by making him still more submissive to his Master. 

It is necessary for every one, who is really anxious to find and serve the Truth, to 
realize that the Truth is not to be found by the present physical and 
mental equipments. It is further necessary to realize that it is nevertheless 
possible to find and serve the Truth by the present defective equipments by the 
grace of Truth Himself. One is then prepared to wait patiently till the initiative of 
the Truth is properly. The person, who is in this genuine expectant mood, is on 
the lookout for the Appearance of the Truth in any form that Truth likes. He 
is prepared to understand that, as Truth is All powerful, He is likely to appear 
to his own defective understanding in a form that is least likely to conform to 
his natural misjudgment. He knows that all these difficulties notwithstanding 
the grace of Truth is sufficiently powerful to prevail over all obstacles and 
to manifest Himself to His servant in a manner that is perfectly inconceivable 
to our defective judgment. 

This is the Theistic disposition proper. It is credulous in the sense that, although 
it is never prepared to remain satisfied with seeming Truth or half truth, it is 
always fully ready to make its unconditional, that is to say, loving submission to 
the Real Truth the moment He makes His Appearance. The Theistic disposition 
is prepared to wait patiently, even inactively, as far as this is at all practicable, till 
the actual Appearance of the Master of his heart. He does not believe in 
pragmatic loyalty. He abhors to serve any thing but the Absolute Truth. To such 
a disposition the Truth is bound to manifest Himself. 



The worship of the feet of Sree Gadadhara or the offering of the pinda to the 
Manes by Sree Gaursundar, is not performed for any other purpose than 
for serving the pleasure of the Lord. An analysis of the forms of the 
rituals, enjoined by the Scriptures, should make it abundantly clear to every 
impartial person that making the service of the Lord the only duty of all persons 
is their only object. There is, therefore, no falling away from Theism by such 
activity even on the part of those who are not in a position to explain their 
motive to the satisfaction of those logicians who are illogically opposed to the 
Theistic disposition. It is the atheistic attitude that makes the ritualistic worship a 
form 

of idolatry. But the atheistic iconoclast is the worst of idolaters as he is actuated 
by the resolve not to recognize the Omnipotence of the Supreme Lord and 
the consequent necessity of His grace for being enabled to distinguish between 
the idol and the Divinity. The iconoclast launches his fury against the Lord, 
Whom he mistakes to be stone or earth by the deluding evidence of his senses, 
whose slave he is by his nature. The truly serving disposition is always really 
humbler than the blade of grass, being aware that nothing is impossible with the 
Lord and that it is never possible to find Him by venting one’s malice against 
His creatures or by the assertion of one’s superior claim to 
selfconceited righteousness. 

The conditioned soul stands in absolute need of grace. This grace can only 
descend to him when he is in the attitude of absolute humility. This grace 
is bestowed directly by the Supreme Lord on the sincere seeker of His grace. 

In the recipient the grace of Godhead expresses His presence in the form of 
the rational inclination of seeking perpetual enlightenment from the devotee 
of Godhead. He, who is disposed to serve the Lord but not His devotee, is 
really disposed to serve nobody except the deluded self. One, who is disposed to 
serve the Lord, is disposed to serve His servant, if possible, with even greater 
loyalty. The loyal subject of the King is not, therefore, less loyal to one who 
is commissioned by the King to carry out his commands in regard to himself. 

The Guru is no other than the Servant of the Lord, commissioned to effect 
the deliverance of those who are really anxious to serve the Lord. The Archa is 
the Lord making Himself accessible to the worship of conditioned souls by 
means of all their defective equipments. The Archa is not an image made by the 
hand of man. Neither is the Guru a mortal like ourselves. It is only the delivered 
soul who can help the conditioned soul to gain his deliverance. It is the 
eternally pure souls, who are themselves infallible by their nature, who are sent 



into this world in the form of the Guru to impart spiritual enlightenment to 
the individual soul liable to be fettered by the flesh. The Guru seems to the 
senses and the sensuous judgment to be an ordinary mortal. But he is not really 
any part of this plane at all, no more than the Archa. Both are equally 
manifestations of the eternal saving Potency of the All-merciful Supreme Lord 
to deliver the conditioned soul from his self-elected bondage of the deluding 
energy. 

By an empiric analysis of the wording of the mantra or the composition of the 
Archa or the eternal conduct of the spiritual guide one cannot hope to gain 
any idea of the substantive plane of the Absolute. Because it happens to be really 
the attitude of refusal to recognize the imperative and moral necessity of 
loyally seeking for the divine grace for the attainment of spiritual enlightenment. 



Chapter 23 His Initiation ( Cont.) 


Ritual may be defined as worship by means of the objects of this world, which 
function alone is available to the conditioned soul, rendered possible by 
the grace of Godhead as revealed by the Scriptures and the spiritual Guide to 
the community of the servants of the Lord. 

The empiric theory, which seeks to derive the form and significance of ritual 
from the worldly activities of the ancient peoples, is based on the assumption 
of the impossibility and superfluity of revelation as the source of worship. But as 
a matter of fact it is never possible for man, by progress in material civilization, 
to attain either to the form or significance of spiritual worship. The form 
of worship can derive its spiritual value, if it has any, only from revelation. As 
it does not possess any mundane significance it is, therefore, independent of 
all mundane reference. It may satisfy the spirit of antiquarian curiosity to 
discover how the superficial aspect of the eternal process of worship varies from 
country to country and from Age to Age. But will any number of such 
discoveries, add to our knowledge of the real meaning of either the form or the 
spirit of true worship? 

If the mind can be supposed to be fit to worship Godhead by means of concepts 
or precepts referring to objects of phenomenal Nature, why should such worship 
be impossible by means of the objects themselves? But mental worship in itself 
is no nearer to Godhead than the show of worship by means of material 
substances, both being made of non-spiritual stuff. The one is as much in need of 
the Divine Sanction as the other, if it is to reach the Divinity at all. The one is as 
much capable of being turned into worship as the other by virtue of such 
Sanction. The controversy among empiricists on the subject of worship rages 
round the external form versus the mental conception both of which are, by 
themselves, i.e., as they appear to the empiricists, wholly devoid of all spiritual 
significance. 

The allied question, bearing on the same issue, may be put thus. 

Granted that a mental and physical activity is endowed with spiritual quality of 
the service of the divinity by the divine sanction, why should divine 
sanction itself be confined to any particular and strictly circumscribes form of 
such activity and not extend to the whole range of secular activities ? There 



is apparently much to be said in favour of such contention from the point of 
view of ordinary rational judgment. If the whole range of activities, both 
physical and mental, be made to be covered by the term 'ritual’ then the 
departmental narrowness, that has come to attach itself to the term, would be 
removed. 

There are also numerous passages in the Scriptures themselves in support of 
such contention and to prove that one, who worships Godhead, necessarily does 
so by every act of his life. 

But notwithstanding all this, spiritual worship is neither narrow and 
departmental nor liberal and comprehensive in the empiric sense. These terms of 
condemnation and praise do not apply to the issue at all. It is, 
therefore, necessary to be humble on the threshold of any serious inquiry into the 
nature of the substantive spiritual function. Pantheistic thought is only one form 
of atheism. No mental speculation in itself is logically admissible regarding 
the Absolute, by reason of the fact that the mind has no access to 
the transcendental plane. 

The form of the ritual is not improved by the suppression of the methods of 
antiquity by more ‘modern’ methods on the ground that these would be 
more ‘intelligible’ to our present judgment. The question of intelligibility in 
the empiric sense does not matter. When Godhead is addressed by the empiricist 
as the Source of all existence, such form of prayer is adopted for the reason that 
it is supposed to be intelligible to our limited understanding. But does the 
prayer become a spiritual function by any such rational approval on the part of 
the worshipper? It is not denied that Godhead is the Source of all existence. 

Neither is it admitted that if a person addresses Godhead as the Source of all 
existence, he will be enabled to be in communion with Godhead by such prayer. 
How does he really know that Godhead is the Source of everything? His real 
ignorance cannot be removed by merely repeating a formula whose meaning it is 
beyond his capacity to understand. If he chooses to remain satisfied with an 
empty performance, he should be considered to be indifferent to the issue. 

If Godhead is the Source of all existence, as the rational faculty claims to know 
instinctively, how is the same aspiring faculty to reconcile such a 
supposition with its own actual utter ignorance of the nature of its relationship 
with its own supposed source? Hydrogen and Oxygen were not instinctively 



claimed to be known as the source of water by the same all-knowing instinct. Is 
it not, therefore, only a silly and superficial vanity that leads such ignorant 
persons to ‘believe’ that Godhead is the Source of all existence? 

Such an attitude of ignorant omniscience, so lightly assumed as their birthright 
in the name of the rational instinct by deluded souls, has to be got rid of 
if religion is to avoid the defect that is attributed by physical scientists to 
the speculative philosophers, viz., that their subject ‘bakes no bread’. The 
sterile philosophy of empiricism has been weighed in the balance for too long a 
period and has been found wholly wanting. The world is in some need of a 
positive and real, and not merely hypothetical, solution of its spiritual 
difficulties. 

In the process of spiritual enlightenment there is also, quite inconceivably to our 
present power of understanding no doubt, a beginning of the process followed by 
a probationary stage which has to be gone through before the goal is reached. 

The first faint glimmering of the approaching light is sufficient to impart the 
consciousness of the categorical nature of the difference that separates the plane 
of the mind and physical body from that of the soul. A11 empiric questionings are 
at once and necessarily solved by this first experience of the actual spiritual life. 

Thereafter arises a new curiosity which relates itself wholly to the transcendental 
plane. The experience of the glimmer of light proceeding from a realm that is yet 
completely out of sight except by the relationship of the light which while 
bearing testimony to the reality of spiritual existence securely keeps the secret of 
all definite knowledge regarding the same, makes one anxious, not for the 
nostrums concocted for their idle amusement by the children of darkness but, for 
positive information from those who really know about that world, which is only 
then actually realized to be perfectly unknown and unknowable to the aspiring 
understanding of man. 

The present Narrative may be regarded in two possible ways. The first is the 
ordinary empiric way for the satisfaction of a limited curiosity born of 
the mental outlook. Such study is not likely to be of much positive benefit. But 
it may have the negative value of removing misconceptions to which even 
the open minded persons are liable by reason of habitual and normal 
association with worldly-minded people. This Narrative may strike the 
imagination of such a person and may induce a few to agree with the point of 
view of the Scriptures as set forth in these pages. If any person thereupon choose 



to undertake to act up to the principles inculcated by the Deeds of Sree Krishna- 
Chaitanya, he will be in a position to realize the necessity of praying for the 
grace of Godhead for directing him to the proper teacher of the Truth. If the 
prayer is, indeed, not altogether hypocritical the sincere seeker of divine aid may 
be rewarded by the mercy of Godhead and find the bona fide spiritual guide. The 
same Influence may also help him to make the complete surrender of himself at 
the feet of the Guru when found and to approach him with the further prayer for 
positive spiritual enlightenment. The mercy of Godhead will further enable such 
a person to be accepted by the Guru. The acceptance by the Guru of his offer 
of submission will be the beginning of his spiritual pupilage, and in proportion 
as he will be enabled to enter into the plans and views of the Guru by the 
method of loyal, willing, rational obedience, the true meaning of the deeds of 
Sree Krishna-Chaitanya will manifest Themselves to his serving disposition. If 
he thereafter reads the Narrative that has been handed down by the former 
serving teachers of the religion (the bona fide Acharyyas) he will gain the 
positive knowledge of the Truth. 

In the following pages of this work the Events of the Career of Sree Krishna- 
Chaitanya, corresponding to the activity of the seeker of the Truth after he has 
sought for and received spiritual enlightenment from the bona fide teacher of the 
Truth, are recorded and interpreted in pursuance of the exposition of 
the Acharyyas, by the method of the service of the bona fide spiritual guide. It 
will not be possible for the uninitiated to enter into the spiritual meaning of such 
a Narrative. But every one will be enabled to avoid forming any hasty and 
adverse opinion if he only keeps in mind the necessary reservations when 
going through the account of the happenings of the transcendental plane to 
which the conditioned soul has no access in their substantive sense. It can be to 
him more or less only like a story of the Fairyland with this difference that the 
realm of the soul is not the concoction of the fertile imagination of man as the 
other is; but on the contrary it is the only Substantive Reality that vitally 
concerns all of us both individually and collectively. No reader of a fairy tale 
ever thinks it worth his while to quarrel with any happenings in the Fairyland 
even if they are in flat contradiction to all experiences of this world. In the case 
of this Narrative also, from this point onward, even if the reader is unable to 
agree with any proposition fully, he need not for an analogous reason cherish 
any feeling of hostility inasmuch as the propositions have no direct application 
to the plane of three dimensions for which alone he is at present 
positively interested. His hostility against the Fairyland would be like fighting 
with a shadow as the land of the Fairies is not capable of being affected by 



his mundane blows; and one should not quarrel with a shadow on principle. If 
one is disposed to quarrel by apprehending any bad effect that the story may 
appear likely to produce on his actual worldly position, he should still be able to 
find consolation in the reflection that his mere desire to banish from this 
world anything that he does not like, will not necessarily rid it of those 
objectionable entities, and, therefore, if those entities are entitled to have a place 
in the world it is the world that deserves to be condemned and not the story 
which would be perfectly harmless but for this possibility of its existence in the 
world despite our desire to the contrary. 

We are not required either by our rational instinct or by the Scriptures to shut our 
ears against anybody. It is only during pupilage that the student is required to 
obey the teacher not mechanically but by the method of progressive cooperating 
conviction. The association with evil-doers, that is so strongly condemned by the 
Scriptures, is to he understood in the similar rational sense. The objectionable 
form of association with evil can arise only when we identify ourselves with the 
evil. It is not always practicable nor desirable to avoid external association with 
evil. But it is always practicable and desirable to have a protesting or at any rate 
an indifferent attitude towards evil. One must not be a consenting associating 
party with evil. A person is not capable of being contaminated by mere external 
association with evil, although he may be living in this world where ‘even the 
light is as darkness.’ The attempt to avoid all association with evil by the 
mechanical method is only another form of association with evil. One, who is 
impure at heart but fastidious in his external conduct, is called in ordinary 
language a hypocrite, who is not less harmful and who is not to be less avoided 
than the downright professed scoundrel. 

There need not be any unnecessary mystery about spiritual matters. Everything 
is not intelligible to everyone. It is necessary also to adopt a method that 
is neither unintelligible nor misleading to the hearer. But nothing need be kept 
a secret unless it is impossible to be divulged without producing serious 
and harmful misunderstanding. The mantra is not to be divulged to another 
person, because this is quite a personal matter. It is also quite proper and logical 
to have the principles of reserve and privacy in the realm of the soul. It is 
not necessary to abuse those principles for securing transitory and narrow 
interests, as we do in this world. They are capable of being used and should by 
all means be used, for serving the Tmth. This will no doubt give a chance to the 
hypocrite and the pseudo-teachers of religion to befool their over-credulous 
victims; but it should befool nobody who does not want to be. befooled by their 



overattachment to the bauble pleasures of this world. 


The nature of those funeral rites, that are enjoined by the Scriptures, requires to 
be understood from the point of view of the service of Godhead. One’s duty 
to one’s parents does not cease with the death of the latter. This admission is 
not avoidable by those who recognize the claim of their parents, to their duty 
in return of benefits received from them. The circle of such duties and benefits 
no doubt belong to the mundane plane. Death is the greatest calamity that 
may befall the relationship of parent and child. It severs the earthly 
connection between them. But does it really sever all connection? The 
elevationists do not believe it does. They suppose that the subtle body survives 
the death of the gross physical body. This subtle body has to be reborn after an 
interval during which it remains dissociated from the gross body, the subtle body 
embodies the principle of material enjoyment. But it does not obtain this 
enjoyment except through the gross body. The subtle body in the dissociated 
state, is called the preta. The funeral rites are intended for the benefit Of the 
preta. This benefit, as understood by the elevationists (smartas), consists in the 
rebirth of the preta in some other gross body. By such rebirth the preta is 
supposed to be delivered from his torments of the preta state. The Salvationists 
on the other hand suppose that the preta is delivered if he is enabled to avoid 
rebirth in the gross body by merging in the Divinity. The Vaishnavas do not 
recognize any special duty to their forbears, for the reason that such duty is 
rendered to the material case which is wrongly identified by the elevationists and 
Salvationists alike with the individual soul who is the person to whom all duties 
are really due. The individual soul is not served by any function that is intended 
for the amelioration of the gross or subtle material case. The Vaishnavas 
accordingly express their duty towards their forbears and all departed persons by 
making their offering at the Feet of Gadadhara. 

At Gaya the round of the funeral ceremonies leads up to the worship of the Feet 
of Vishnu, as their consummation. This is the relation in which the 
Smarta ceremonies are intended by the Scriptures to stand to the spiritual 
function proper. The Manes, i.e., souls imprisoned in the subtle bodies, are 
benefited by their descendants, worship of the Feet of Gadadhara. The 
performance of funeral rites by Godhead Himself is not to be supposed a 
concession to elevationist or Salvationist method or objective. The avoidance of 
the ceremonies, by those who do not worship the Feet of Gadadhara, is also 
not supported by the conduct of Sree Gaursundar. What it is intended 
to significant, is that the smarta practice is the result of gratitude that is 



naturally felt by a person, who confounds himself with his physical cases, 
towards the forbears of those cases. One, who is in the deluded condition, need 
not be hypocritically ungrateful to his worldly parents till he has been really 
relieved from the state of ignorance. He would be delivered from his ignorance 
and all supposed obligations of that state, if he could attain to the pure service of 
the feet of Vishnu. This desideratum is recognized by the arrangement for 
the performance of the sraddha ceremonies at Gaya leading up to the worship 
of the Feet of Gadadhara. According to the dictum of the Scriptures a person, 
who desires to attain to the service of Godhead, should perform all duties 
enjoined by the custom of his society or preferably by the Veda in the way that 
is conducive to the attainment of the spiritual function. The smarta view is 
that the devotee of Godhead is also under equal obligation to appease the Manes 
by the performance of the sraddha ceremonies. This is the reverse of the 
principle that is followed at Gaya in the due performance of the funeral rites. 

The Supreme Teacher recognized by His Conduct the justification of the 
elevationist and Salvationist function for the social purpose, while pointing to 
the attainment of the service of Godhead as the objective towards which 
all activities should tend if they are to possess any positive value for the soul. 

If any portion of the funeral ritual is opposed to this end it is 
necessarily unacceptable to the Vaishnavas, for that reason. 

The ritual of diksha or initiation is liable to be similarly misunderstood. The 
smarta view of the ceremony is similar to their view of the funeral ritual. 

The smarta is anxious to provide for the needs of the gross and subtle 
physical cares. He deliberately ignores the need of the soul, because that is 
opposed to the interests (?) of the physical cases as understood by the smartas. 
The ceremony of diksha, according to the smarta view, confers only on 
the Brahmana by seminal birth the eligibility for the worship of Sree 
Narayana. Those, who are not Brahmanas by seminal birth, are, according to this 
view, enabled by the process only to be born as Brahmanas in their next birth; 
but it does not entitle them to worship Sree Narayana in their present life. 

The Brahmana, who is eligible to worship Narayana or Godhead, is thus 
supposed to be the entity, viz., the physical cases, that is born of mundane 
parents. But as a matter of fact the physical cases have no access to Vishnu and 
the process of diksha cannot accordingly apply to them and for this reason 
diksha is not a social but a spiritual function the nature of which is 
misunderstood by those so-called Brahmanas who are anxious to retain intact 
their hereditary social privileges. 



By seminal birth, on the contrary, everyone is made a Sudra who is the opposite 
of a Brahmana. The seminal birth provides the physical cases by which 
the conditioned soul is made subject to the sufferings of this world, or, in 
other words, is made a Sudra which term literally means ‘one who is subject 
to sorrow’. By the purificatory ceremony of Upanayana, or being conducted to 
the Guru for attaining to the knowledge (Veda) of one’s relationship with 
Godhead (diksha) in order to be enabled to serve Him on the spiritual plane, the 
Sudra is re-born, not as a physical or mental case but, as a soul or student of the 
Veda. This second birth is not seminal birth, because the pupil, who submits to 
the Guru, is not the physical body born of semen but the soul inhabiting the 
same. The substantive consciousness, that one is not the physical body but the 
soul inhabiting the body, can alone enable one to serve the Guru for obtaining 
the true knowledge of the function of his own proper self. 

The ceremony of Upanayana, therefore, admits the necessity, on the part of the 
conditioned soul, of serving the Guru and represents the soul’s act of 
appearing before the Guru in order to learn to serve Godhead. The ceremony of 
diksha confers on the soul actual spiritual enlightenment. When the Guru is 
satisfied by the probationary test that the candidate for spiritual 
enlightenment possesses the genuine aptitude for service, he confers on him the 
knowledge of his relationship with Godhead which enables him to serve 
Godhead. By means of diksha a person is thus born a third time. It is a case not 
of seminal birth, but of the completion of the probationary stage of the spiritual 
pupilage of the soul. 

The purificatory process of Upanayana and diksha are also proved to be 
necessarily open to all persons irrespective of seminal birth. The seminal 
birth can bestow only mundane aptitudes. The seminal birth cannot convey, 
or entitle one to, the spiritual nature. That, which conveys or entitles to 
the spiritual nature, is spiritual birth by Upanayana and diksha. There is 
real analogy but a difference of plane between the seminal and spiritual birth. 

Upanayana is the process of being connected to the Guru. This refers to the 
function of the shiksha Guru. The shiksha Gurus may be many, but the 
diksha Guru is only one. The shiksha Gurus are the associated counterparts of 
the diksha Guru who is the associated counterwhole of the Divinity Himself. 
There is thus only one diksha Guru who is associated with his infinity of agents 
or limbs whose function is to lead the intending disciple to the diksha Guru. 

The diksha Guru may, indeed, be also the shiksha Guru, but not necessarily so. 



The distinction between the shiksha Guru and the diksha Guru is one relating 
to their respective spiritual functions which do not involve any 
unwholesome implication of inferiority in the mundane sense. The shiksha Guru 
is, therefore, to be as much obeyed by the disciple as the diksha Guru himself. 

The function of diksha, in its ritualistic aspect, consists of the process of 
imparting the mantra by the diksha Guru which is spoken by him into the ear 
of the disciple without being allowed to be heard by any other person. It is 
the method of Truth communicating Himself to an individual soul in the Form 
of the Transcendental sound Appearing on the lips of His devotee. The mantra, 
as we have explained elsewhere, is the Holy Name in the Form in which He 
is coupled with the process of self dedication of an individual to the Guru. It is 
a specific matter that delivers the particular individual from the grip of all 
mental delusion by making him throw himself on the protection of the Name 
under the exclusive direction of the Guru. The process of initiation is not a 
limited one. It is as much a continued process as the process of being helped by 
the shiksha Guru for approaching the diksha Guru. No one of these processes 
is capable of terminating is a limited result. They are eternally co-present in 
a relation that is progressive but without being hampered by the 
unwholesome imperfection of the principle of limitation. 

It has been necessary to explain the process of entry into the spiritual life in 
some detail for several reasons. A good deal of misconception has 
gathered round the issue. This misconception is responsible for the mushroom 
growth of an endless variety of pseudo-forms of the process that are being 
constantly manufactured by quacks and knaves for leading astray simpletons and 
rascals, by the offer of their support to diverse forms of pernicious worldly 
activities. It is not also easy to withstand the temptation of being misled by the 
appeal to the principle of pseudo-ethics manufactured by intellectualists for 
justifying a life of the sensualists’ paradise for belittling the spiritual issue which 
transcends the petty concerns of a nine days’ existence. It is absolutely necessary 
to have this sense of perspective, if one is not to miss the only purpose for which 
the subject, treated in this work has been offered to his unbiased and 
serious consideration. 

Nothing is easier than to make a butt of ridicule of the concerns of the eternal 
life by the method of empiric buffoonery. There is an enormous literature, that is 
also alarmingly growing in volume by leaps and bounds, which has 
been deliberately seeking to dissuade the limited mind from any thought of 



the Absolute by covering, with their flimsy ridicule, all transcendental claims 
of religion. Such effusions may have been partly called forth by the 
somewhat natural reaction against the practices of the pseudo religionists 
who unfortunately abound all over the world. They also serve the salutary 
purpose of checking the quarrels of the quacks and hypocritical followers of 
the different religious persuasions. But the warfare, that is waged by 
atheism against the forms of pseudo-religion, is also itself part and parcel of the 
opera show of our deluded existence. The history of the doings of man is full 
of instructive episodes in a short chapter of a real tragedy of errors which we 
are gravely asked to regard as the progressive march of an ethical 
civilization towards increasing perfection. The reader has had enough experience 
of regarding the doings of the performers on the worldly stage from this 
supposed optimistic and universally advertised promising point of view. It is not 
our business here to offer him more of the same familiar commodity. 

The real transcendental point of view is condemned by empiricists of all 
countries, with the exception of India and of those lands which have 
received their creeds from her, as being the hallucinate product of a sterile 
pessimism born of a decadent material civilization fretting over the solid 
achievements of successful rivals. India, which is the cradle and chosen land of 
the hankering for the realization of the transcendental existence, presents the 
spectacle of the continuing attempt to treat social issues by the Scriptural method 
by refusing to admit the absolute value of mundane interests. No school of 
Indian philosophy professes to value social activity divorced from the spiritual 
purpose. The difficulty in this country is due not to the absence of traditional 
opinion in favour of the endeavour after the realization of the transcendental 
existence, as distinguished from the mundane, but to the misunderstanding 
and mispresentation, by different schools of misguided exponents, of the nature 
of the spiritual function itself. Whereas in those countries, which are proud 
of possessing a social organization that is not ‘priest-ridden’ and aims frankly 
at the multiplication and ‘improvement’ of the opportunities of 
sensuous enjoyment and the hopeless ‘amelioration’ of the inevitable 
consequences of the unhampered pursuit of this optimistic course, the difficulty 
is due to the absence of all traditional hankering for the attainment of the 
spiritual state. 

This last difficulty is infinitely increased by the misrepresentations of the whole 
body of empiric literature which is never tired of harping ad nauseam on 
the congenial theme of the glories of this mundane existence and holds up its 



nose in indignant scorn and contempt if the soundness of its wretched point of 
view is challenged by straight talk which it affects to invite so vehemently on its 
own side. 

It is not our purpose merely to condemn the activities of this world. We should 
really try to understand the nature of our proper relationship with them. 

We should not be willing to be satisfied with any hypothetical views on this 
allimportant subject. We should not be violent lovers of the worldly 
sojourn without reservation, nor should we be prepared to desire its perpetuation 
as it is and as it is proposed to be made by those who derive their knowledge 
and wisdom from their experience of this world and apply them solely for 
further elaboration of our worldly activities on their present lines. We should 
long for an unobstructed vision of the Absolute Truth and believe in the 
possibility of the attainment of such vision, and to adjust our activities during 
this worldly sojourn to the requirements of our real and whole position revealed 
by the knowledge of the Absolute Truth. We should be disposed to regard the 
attitude, that is content to be satisfied with less than the Absolute Truth, as one 
of insidious and unpardonable revolt against the Absolute Truth. The 
present Narrative offers a Career That is wholly devoted to the service of the 
Absolute Truth. We are disposed to consider a pragmatist, if he does not possess 
the supreme regard due to the devotee of the Absolute Truth, as no better than 
a dangerous cheat and a sensuous hypocrite who wants only to indulge 
his aptitude for untruth under the guise of a mock concern for the Truth. 

We, therefore, claim to be neither pessimists nor optimists in the sense ill which 
the contending factions of the empiric sages array themselves under their 
respective worldly banners. We should share their furious interest on behalf of 
the worldly life. We only invite our readers to lend their receptive ear to 
the narration of the actual conduct of Nimai Pandit, as He manifested Himself 
to this world, after He had received spiritual enlightenment by 
unconditional submission to the feet of the bona fide spiritual Guide. By the 
process of diksha, with the intention of trying to enter the spirit of the same from 
the point of view of the Narrative itself that has been handed down by the 
succession of the spiritual teachers. 

The boon for which Nimai Pandit prayed to Sree Iswara Puri, was love for 
Krishna. He surrendered to Sree Iswara Puri His Body and Mind unconditionally 
for the attainment of the above purpose. When one obtains the actual sight of the 
bona fide Spiritual Guide, that is of the real exclusive servant of the Absolute, by 
the grace of Godhead, the duty, that he has to perform on his side, is to make the 



unconditional surrender of himself to the Feet of the bona fide agent of the 
Absolute. This is the logical and consistent course but is impossible of 
realization in practice except by divine grace. 

If the complete surrender to the Guru is made the spiritual mantra reveals 
himself to the disciple. It is now our task to trace the growth of this 
loving devotion in Nimai Pandit. But as we proceed to do so we must bear in 
mind the fact that Nimai Pandit was, indeed, no other than the Lord Himself. 

This is noticeable in the manner of Sree Iswara Puri towards his Disciple. He 
says that when he looks at Nimai Pandit he obtains the bliss of beholding 
Krishna Himself. The Vaishnava Guru does not regard any one as his disciple; 
but he does not, therefore, think that his disciples are Krishna Himself. The 
Vaishnava Guru regards his disciples as his Gurus and himself as their disciple. 
The Vaishnava Guru regards his disciples as his Gurus for the reason that as 
servants of his Lord they are really his Gurus. The disciple, who is under 
agreement to serve the Lord, becomes, by that very agreement, in the estimation 
of the Guru to whom he is bound by the agreement, the servant of the Lord Who 
is served by the Guru, and, therefore, his Guru. Iswara Puri would have been 
justified in addressing Nimai Pandit as his Guru after Nimai Pandit had agreed 
to become the Servant of Krishna. But he did not call his Disciple his Guru but 
said He was Krishna Himself. This shows the real state of things as realized by 
Sree Iswara Puri. It is really the Lord Who gave the boon of His Mercy to Iswara 
Puri under the guise of receiving initiation from His Guru. 

Unless this point is properly grasped there will be difficulty in following the 
subsequent developments. Sree Iswara Puri belonged to the communion of 
Sree Madhvacharyya. Initiation at the hands of Sree Iswara Puri marks the entry 
of Nimai Pandit into the Madhva Community. It was certainly not incumbent 
on the Lord to enroll Himself under the banner of Madhva. This would 
prevent Him, according to usage, from breaking away from the tenets of a 
particular Community. It is well known that Sree Madhva did not teach the 
service of Sree Sree Radha-Govinda which was preached and practiced by 
Nimai Pandit. There is thus only connection but not identity of teaching between 
Sree Chaitanya and Sree Madhva. Sree Madhabendra Puri, the Guru of Sree 
Iswara Puri, was the first of the Acharyyas to manifest his inclination, in an 
elementary form, for the worship of Krishna as his Consort. In this respect he 
stands alone among the followers of Sree Madhva. For this reason the followers 
of Sree Chaitanya regard Sree Madhabendra Puri as the germinating seed of the 
tree of loving devotion that was manifested to the world in its fully developed 



form by Sree Chaitanya. 


These points of contact and difference will be dealt with more fully as we have 
occasion to examine, in the following pages, the details of the 
devotional developments of Nimai Pandit. The Lord accepted initiation from 
Sree Iswara Puri in order to satisfy, the requirement of the scriptures that the 
mantra cannot be efficacious except within the spiritual communion. In other 
words spiritual activity is not a wholly individualistic affair. We have seen above 
that the mantra concerns the individual as regards its reception and practice of 
recital. But at the same time the mantra withdraws the individual spiritually 
from the society of those who are uninitiated. If the individual continues his 
affinity with the uninitiated after his initiation in ways that are adverse to his 
newly-formed spiritual connection, the mantra loses all its efficacy. This implies, 
and is a corollary from, the exclusive nature of the service of the Absolute and 
also lays down the nature of spiritual relationship among the servants of 
Godhead, which is categorically different from what prevails in the society of 
those who do not consciously serve the Divinity. It was in order to observe 
this fundamental condition of entry into the spiritual sphere, laid down in 
the Scriptures, that Nimai Pandit went through the form of spiritual initiation 
at the hands of Sree Iswara Puri who belonged to one of the four 
theistic communities recognized by the Scriptures. The New Dispensation does 
not, therefore, claim that it is altogether New. It does not belie but on the 
contrary only fulfills the requirements of the Scriptures in the most effective 
manner. 

The Scriptures had announced that the New Dispensation for the Iron Age will 
be given by the Lord Himself and that the form of worship, that will be 
thus established, will be the congregational chant (sankirtana). There was, 
therefore, sufficient Scriptural authorization for the establishment of the New 
Worship without reference to the existing theistic communities who 
possessed apparently somewhat different methods of worship. But the New 
Dispensation was to be accomplished, and could be accomplished, according to 
the Scriptures and in no other way than by the recognition of the necessity 
of initiation into one of the authorized theistic communions. The 
Lord subsequently took the trouble of bringing about the spiritual reconciliation 
of the apparent differences of the four Vaishnava Communities, by giving to 
the world the complete explanation of the function of the soul revealed by 
the Scriptures. The Teachings of Sree Chaitanya in fact gathered up those of 
the former Acharyyas in a Scriptural Synthesis of a supremely higher order. His 



full interpretation of the service of Sree Sree Radha Govinda, Embodied in 
His Career, is not identical with the teaching or practice of any of the 
four Vaishnava Acharyyas, but the further and complete working out of 
the fundamentals of the teachings of all of them has been one of its 
inevitable achievements. 

That the mantra, which had been received by Nimai Pandit from Sree Iswara 
Puri who had got it from Sree Madhabendra Puri, was to bear fruit in an 
ample measure, did not take a long time to manifest itself. Shortly after His 
Initiation, as Nimai Pandit was one day engaged in meditating of the mantra in 
His privacy, the impulse of loving devotion, which had been gathering 
strength, burst through all restraints and showed itself in unique external 
manifestations. The Lord was heard to be crying with a loud Voice in the act of 
reciting certain verses from the Scriptures, the import of which is as follows,— 
’Oh Krishna! 

Oh My Darling! Sree Hari, My Life! Oh, whither hast Thou gone after stealing 
My Heart? I, indeed, got My Lord;—but where is He gone?’ 

The Lord went on crying and reciting these verses and rolling on the ground till 
His Whole Beautiful Lrame became gray with the dust, while He was 
thus immersed in the liquid bliss of loving devotion. The Lord, indeed, cried at 
the top of His Voice, in the pang of a Deep Agony, 'Whither, Darling Krishna 
art Thou gone thus abandoning Me?’ His great restlessness under the impulse 
of loving devotion appeared all the more strange as the Lord had formerly 
been distinguished by the quality of His extreme reserve on the subject of 
religion. The Lord rolled on the ground and cried aloud. He was adrift on the 
ocean of loving separation from Himself. 

This gradually brought all His pupils to the spot who succeeded, after prolonged 
endeavours, with the greatest tenderness and loving care, in restoring Him to His 
normal condition. But the Lord did not change His Purpose. He now proposed to 
His students that they should at once return to their homes. He was resolved on 
His Part not to enter the world again. He was resolved to go to Mathura to find 
Krishna, the Lord of His Life. All the students appealed to Him, by every 
possible method, to persuade Him to be calm. But the Lord of Vaikuntha, deeply 
immersed in the rasa (mellowing liquid) of devotion, could find no rest in His 
Heart under His great anxiety and did not know where to stay. In this condition 
the Lord, without the knowledge of any of His associates, set out for Mathura, 



by the impulse of love for Krishna, towards the closing hours of night on one of 
these days. He moved forward on the road with the piteous cry, ‘Oh Krishna! Oh 
My Darling! Where shall I find Thee?’ When He had proceeded a certain 
distance in this manner the Lord heard a celestial voice saying, “Jewel of the 
twice-born, forbear to go to Mathura for the present. There will come the proper 
time for going there. Thou wilt go there when the time will arrive. Retrace Thy 
Steps Home to Nabadwip for the present. Thou art the Lord of Sree Vaikuntha. 
Thou hast appeared in the world for the deliverance of the people, with all Thy 
Own. Thou wilt freely give away the treasure of loving devotion to the world by 
performing the kirtana through the infinity of the worlds. Thou has appeared in 
the world to give away to its denizens the good, by whose mellow quality 
Brahma, Shiva, Sanaka and their associates, are distracted with joy and which is 
sung by the Great Lord Ananta Himself. This is known to Thyself. We are Thy 
servants, and we speak as Thou Desirest. Therefore, have we made this 
submission at Thy Feet. Thou art Providence Himself. Thou art the Master. What 
Thou wilst is never thwarted by opposition. Therefore Supreme Lord, may Thou 
be pleased to return to Thy Home. May: Thou come again to see the town of 
Mathura after a time.’ On hearing the Voice from Heaven Sree Gaursundar was 
persuaded to retrace His Steps with a glad Heart. Coming back to His lodging, 
the Lord prepared to return Home with all His disciples with the purpose of 
making manifest to the world the function of loving devotion to Krishna. 

The reader is introduced with staggering suddenness into an atmosphere which is 
not at all familiar to him in his normal mundane existence. If he is disposed to 
exercise his judgment at all he might be inclined to suppose the exhibition 
of love for Krishna as the effect of a strong emotion on a naturally 
and extraordinarily sanguine temperament. But he is at once assured by 
Thakur Brindavandas that prior to His Initiation Nimai Pandit did not wear His 
Heart on His sleeves. He was, on the contrary, possessed of a depth of reserve 
that baffled all penetration. This is the description of an unusually 
balanced temperament. It also fully accords with the respect and dread with 
which, as a Professor, Nimai Pandit was universally regarded by His fellow 
townsmen. His Fame as Professor had not remained confined to Nabadwip. The 
leading Professor of Nabadwip was at that time, as now, the greatest savant of 
the whole country. All this implies neither a morbid sentimentalism nor the lack 
of a balanced intellect. 

Attempts have been made on the testimony of nobody but by most illogical 
inference from the events of His subsequent career regarded from the 



dishonest sceptic’s point of view, to give publicity to the opinion that Nimai 
Pandit was never a particularly brilliant scholar. He was only the teacher of 
Vyakarana which has been described by one of His associates, who became 
subsequently His devotee, as a subject of study fit for children. This, it has been 
suppose, proves that Nimai Pandit was not a great scholar. But this view does not 
take into consideration the testimony of the earliest accounts of His Career 
which informs us that He was the greatest scholar of Nabadwip of His time and 
in all branches of knowledge. They are also careful to inform us that it was 
His Favorite pastime to go about the streets in the company of His 
pupils challenging every one to learned controversy with Him in any branch of 
study. The work of Thakur Brindavandas was written within less than forty years 
of the Disappearance of the Lord. We find that the Lord met and defeated in 
open controversy all the scholars of all parts of India. This could not be regarded 
as even an exaggerated account of the neurotic performance of a 
mad sentimentalist. Those, who are at all acquainted with the nature of 
theological controversies in India, should be aware that it is no child’s play to 
defeat an Indian Pandit in open controversy in His subject. 

‘But there is far more convincing proof of His perfect rational sanity than all 
this. The theological system, which is the Teaching of Sree Chaitanya, 
remains intact to this day. Some indications of its nature have already been 
available to the reader of the foregoing pages of this Narrative. It is for the 
reader to judge whether they constitute a revolutionary and unparalleled advance 
on every system of every school that has been prevalent in the world before or 
since His time. But that, which has been placed before the reader, is only 
that infinitesimally small portion what bears to be conveyed in the 
defective vocabulary that is at our disposal for the purpose. No vocabulary of 
this world can touch even the outermost fringe of the Absolute Truth whose 
complete face is presented by the Career of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya, the 
Absolute Himself, in the Agony of an endless striving for beholding Himself as 
He really is. 

The difficulty that the worldling has to overcome in order to be won to a rational 
faith in the Transcendental Nature of the Absolute, is that he is made by all his 
cherished habits of education and association to believe implicitly in the 
testimony of his senses. When Nimai Pandit is found by one’s eyes to be 
no more than a human being like oneself, it should be impossible to be won 
over by mere theological arguments to a stable conviction of His 
transcendental nature. It would be still less possible to believe in His divinity by 



the same method. 


This natural disinclination to believe in His transcendence would not be 
diminished by the closest possible scrutiny of His Career from the 
confirmed empiric point of view. The ordinary empiric attitude is to expect to 
find transcendence in the form that must wholly bewilder the understanding by 
the manner of a miracle. If Nimai Pandit possesses a Body which can be touched 
by my hands, seen by my eyes, how can such Body be regarded as something 
really extraordinary ? Nothing mundane is ordinarily expected to be found in 
the mundane sense in the truly transcendental. Should, not, therefore, 

Nimai Pandit if He is really transcendental, have nothing in common with 
us according to mundane expectation? 

The reply to such questions has already been given more than once in the course 
of this narrative, transcendence does not mean the denial of the mundane. It 
simply means that the transcendent is inconceivable to our 
present understanding. For example it was inconceivable to His contemporaries 
that Nimai Pandit is really a transcendental person. This is quite in conformity 
with the peculiar characteristic of transcendence. It need not obey, it is sure to 
belie, all expectations of its mundane observers. No imagining on the part of 
the empiricists, by the negative method of analysis of mundane experience, 
can enable him to get to the real plane of transcendence. It is only by the mercy 
of the latter that he can have any access to him. Transcendence reserves the 
right of showing, or not showing, himself to the mundane spectator. He refuses 
to disclose his nature to one who does not desire to serve the Truth. This is not 
at all unreasonable, as we all recognize the paramount duty of serving the 
Truth in order to be enabled to realize our own proper nature by reference to 
the Truth. 

The theory of miracle, in the sense in which the term is ordinarily supposed to 
stand for a transcendental occurrence, must be wholly discarded if we are to 
be enabled to approach the subject of transcendence in the truly scientific way. 

The power of performing miracles, in the ordinary sense of that term, cannot and 
need not be attributed to the divinity. The transcendence of Godhead consists in 
this that He does not require any extraneous proof of His divinity to maintain His 
transcendence. He is everything without being anything. This is the real nature 
of His transcendence. Godhead has been accordingly described in the Bhagavata 
as possessing a Medium Form. In other words there is prima facie nothing 



extraordinary at all about Godhead as He really is. This is the proof of His 
supreme freedom from all form and convention. The Divinity is also declared to 
have a specific form of His own who is like the human. This is not proved to be 
untrue for the reason that it is nothing apparently extraordinary to the judgment 
of man. The human form of the divinity is not the human form of non-divine 
man. Sree Krishna is free from all limiting connotations of the term ‘man’ and is 
at the same time Human in a manner that is inconceivable to man himself. 

Such a view no doubt provides a capital opportunity for cheats and hypocrites to 
come forward as the Avataras of Godhead, an opportunity that has not also failed 
to be exploited in the most shameless way, specially in this country. But the 
exhibition of such monstrous wickedness by all the sinners of this world, will be 
no palliative for the error of those who are, with equal hypocrisy, thereby led to 
hold to any belief which they know very well to be radically opposed to their 
own basic conception of the nature of the Divinity. No hypocrisy, not even that 
of the most subtle kind, is naturally permitted to trespass into the realm of the 
Absolute, for the simple reason that it happens to be a revolt against the service 
of the Truth as He is. 

Nimai Pandit cries like a mad-man for Sree Krishna. He does nothing else, but 
always longs for the sight of Krishna. Who then is this Nimai Pandit and 
Who also is this Sree Krishna to whom He realizes Himself to be so 
exclusively attached by love ? 

We have to turn to the Bhagavata for understanding the meaning of this 
Extraordinary Conduct. The shlokas, which Nimai Pandit was reciting as 
he wept loudly in His agony of separation from Krishna, are to be found in 
the Bhagavata. Krishna is leaving for Mathura. The shlokas express the grief of 
the milkmaids on that occasion. It is on the plane of Braja that Nimai Pandit 
finds Himself in consequence of His initiation. He is turned into a denizen of 
Braja that is now His real plane, while this world only serves to increase His 
sense of separation from Krishna. In order to enable the reader to avoid any 
gross misunderstanding of the nature of the spiritual function itself, manifested 
in the activities of Nimai Pandit from this time, we shall try to set forth in the 
next chapter a few additional considerations towards the elucidation of His 
conduct as devotee of Krishna. 



Chapter 24 His Initiation and After 


The method of service by the mood of separation is the distinctive feature, the 
differential as it were, of the religion of pure devotion that is exhibited by 
the Conduct of Nimai Pandit after His Initiation. It is this which makes the 
religion of pure devotion the antipode of the worship (?) of Material Energy by 
the mood of enjoyment represented by the gross type of the Shakta Cult. 

The worship of Godhead, being located on the transcendental plane, cannot 
be practiced in its positive or substantive form on the material plane. 

But neither is the spiritual function performed by the method of abstention from 
material enjoyment. The method of abstention is a radically 
unnatural, hypocritical and pessimistic attitude. Why should a person abstain 
from the ordinary activities of this world? If one loses any organ of sense should 
it be regarded as any cause for congratulation in itself ? Any deliberate attempt 
to be deprived of the functions of all the senses, cannot be supposed, for the 
same reason, to be either desirable or equivalent to any positive function on 
the transcendental plane. Moreover the process itself of being deprived of 
one’s senses is really impracticable. Any offense against Physical Nature 
is automatically punished by an equally violent re-action. Nature always takes 
her revenge. 

The sensuous aptitude is the natural condition for the physical body under the 
direction of the mind which is dependent on the sense-organs for all its activities. 
This is the fact. The world is not an illusion, to be got rid of by the mere desire 
of any person. Those, who believe in the philosophy of illusion and the 
omnipotence of the mind, fall thereby only more deeply into the clutches of the 
sensuous nature. The victims of cynicism may not be themselves prepared to 
admit the sterile failure of their cherished misconceptions, but it is none the less 
patent to all impartial observers. 

When, therefore, it is stated that Sree Gaursundar practiced the pure devotion of 
Krishna by the Mood of Separation, as distinct from that of material enjoyment 
practiced by the elevationists (or materialistic Shaktas), it is not to be supposed 
that He necessarily belonged to the opposite camp of equally materialistic 
ascetic Salvationists. As a matter of fact He belonged to neither materialist camp. 
He was acting according to the pure dictates of the soul when he wakes from his 
mundane stupor to find himself wholly off his proper plane in this world. The 



plank of the elevationists as well as of the Salvationists offered Him the 
alternative aspects of the perverted spiritual function that prevails on the 
mundane plane. Elevationism is fruitful of transitory positive activities which are 
essentially irrational in their nature, although they seem to be true for a time; 
while Salvationism offers freedom from the round of such activities by 
substituting in place of the positive a number of impracticable, negative equally 
irrational and transitory activities. The stuff in either case is the same, viz., an 
unintelligible existence depending on the physical senses for its functioning. It 
is, therefore, no wonder that the Salvationists should consider himself saved only 
by his total immunity from the shackles of his present unwholesome existence as 
a thinking individual with compulsory, positive tantalizing functions. 

The quarrel between Elevationism and Salvationism is as old as the hills. It has 
also remained the eternal Gordian Knot which cannot be untied by any 
earthly thinking. Each can be justified only by including the other which is 
logically its direct negation. This vicious circle is the very plane of all empiric 
thinking on the subject of itself. 

Nimai Pandit was perfectly aware of the insoluble nature of this problem of 
empiricism and He took care not to embrace either of those alternatives. 

He found Himself instead on the real positive plane of the Absolute. This plane 
is not one of sensuous activities at all. On the mundane plane the senses 
demand their own gratification. On the spiritual plane the senses are found to 
be absolutely free from this hankering. The sensuous hankerings of 
the Elevationists are capable of being only suppressed. The Salvationists are 
never cured of their longing for material enjoyment which is indirectly or 
directly the very stuff of all existence on the material plane. 

If I suddenly find myself on a plane where the senses do not require their own 
gratification, I should be left without any motive for active existence. This is 
the seemingly rational conclusion of the Salvationists. But Nimai Pandit did 
not find that it is really so. He found that He was being prevented from 
exercising the proper function of His Senses by His Separation from the only 
Object towards Whom it is worthy of being performed. He found no worthy 
function to be performed by His senses towards this world. He desired an 
infinity of functions to be performed towards the Absolute. But the Absolute had 
ceased to be accessible to Him after a sudden momentary revelation. This was 
the plight in which He found Himself. 



The empiric critic might be inclined to agree to this for a reason of his own. He 
may think that such a state is identical with the goal of the Salvationists. 

If Nimai Pandit did nothing but cry for Krishna night and day, did He not 
thereby limit Himself to the minimum of barren transitory performances which 
is the cherished goal of ascetic Salvationists? 

But as a matter of fact the ascetics themselves of that period did not recognize 
the Performances of Nimai Pandit as coming under the requirements 
of Salvationism. They said that He was only a soft-hearted sentimentalist. 

They scorned His company and His philosophy, as being utterly incompatible 
with a life of austerities. 

Nimai Pandit was, therefore, out of His element both among Elevationists and 
Salvationists. Neither could He find any other footing of His own in this 
world. Thereupon He behaved as one who is distraught with a great sorrow, and 
found no consolation except in the talk of Krishna. His sorrow was that He had 
found Krishna but that He had been immediately forsaken by Him. He had lost 
sight of Him. But He could not live without seeing Him. His only concern was to 
find Him again. He was interested in the company and talks of those who 
were attached to Krishna and who might enable Him to find Krishna. He had 
no duties till He found Krishna. Can such a Person be described as a 
Salvationist who seeks freedom from the miseries of his individual existence? Or 
can He be regarded as an Elevationist, who is bent upon finding his goal in 
the gratification of his own senses ? 

Nimai Pandit gave up all earthly occupation from the moment of His initiation, 
devoting Himself heart and soul to the Search for Krishna. Did He also expect to 
find Him ? He was engaged in this Search for the rest of His Career. The Search 
served to intensify the pang of separation from His only Beloved. He ceased at 
first to care for the ordinary duties of a householder and finally renounced the 
world and lived away at Puri, far from His widowed mother and loving consort, 
who were left to be taken care of by, and to care for, Krishna, in His place. 

Such a course, although at first sight it seems to bear a close external 
resemblance to Salvationism, is radically different from the same. To 
love Krishna is the summum bonum of all animation. The love for Krishna had 
been aroused in Nimai Pandit as the result of His Initiation. But from the 
very beginning it had the form of the anguish of loving separation from the 
object of His love. This was the fulfillment, brought about by the process of 



initiation, of His spiritual need. He had gained the summum bonum in this form. 


If one is seriously disposed to settle down in a contented mood in this world, 
such a person cannot be regarded as possessing an iota of real love for 
Krishna. Krishna is never to be found in this world. It is also necessarily 
impossible to serve one who cannot be found. A person, who is favoured by the 
sight of Krishna, is thereby deprived of all taste for the life on the plane of 
sensuous existence that alone is available in this world. In this terrible 
predicament what is such a person to do for passing his time ? 

Krishna shows Himself to the neophyte only once, at the moment of the 
fulfillment of the probationary stage of his spiritual pupilage, and 
immediately vanishes from his view. This, indeed, sets him on the real quest. Till 
the novice has been favoured by the sight of Krishna he has no love for the Real 
Krishna. The instant he is blessed by the sight of Krishna he finds Krishna to be 
his only beloved and he is ready with the offer of his all for His service. But 
Krishna has no need for the things of this world. The pure soul, who has once 
been blessed by the sight of Krishna, is thereby enabled to know also this 
perfectly well. He, therefore, on his part does not expect nor want that Krishna 
should actually allow Himself to be served by the offerings of mundane things. 

In other words that form of worship, which bears the Scriptural designation of 
archana, cannot also have an exclusive attraction for such a person. 

It is possible to worship Godhead by means of the objects and thoughts of this 
world. But this form of worship can be but symbolical at its very best. It is 
not possible to attain to the substantive spiritual service of Godhead on 
the mundane plane. But notwithstanding this necessary reservation the process 
of worship represented by archana possesses the greatest value during the 
period of novitiate on the path of spiritual endeavour. It is not also correct to say 
that archana is symbolical worship. It should be described as the practice of 
learning to regard all mundane objects as being unacceptable to Godhead. The 
food, which is offered to Krishna by the process of archana, is not the 
mundane eatable. But it is nevertheless offered to Him by uttering the formula 
that the act of such offering is only the mental function which has a 
correspondence in the spiritual sphere and that the offering is therefore, made by 
means of the formula which shields the worshipper against mistaking the 
mundane act for the spiritual. The person who performs archana is required, as 
the initial act of the process, to try to realize that it is his soul who is offering 
worship. After this attitude has been assumed the object of worship and the 



articles of offering are regarded as further items in a corresponding function. The 
mantras impress this vital difference on the mind of the worshipper. All this 
precaution is necessary in order to guard oneself against the profane error that 
the articles of offering or any mundane figure of, the object of worship to whom 
they are offered or the mind or body of the worshipper, are the entities engaged 
in the service of Godhead on the spiritual plane. The mantra says that they are 
not. The archana, however, is not a symbolical process. The worshipper is 
instructed not to suppose that he is doing anything which can be conceived, 
either symbolically or otherwise, as at all like the spiritual process on which he 
is engaged. The mantra forbids him to exercise his mind at all on the subject. 

The consideration, that affords the real clue to the spiritual significance of the 
method of archana as a valid form of worship, is to be sought elsewhere than 
in the visible items actually employed in the worship. The process derives 
its spiritual value from the fact that it has the sanction of Godhead Himself. It is, 
of course, perfectly conceivable that a person should be disposed to cherish 
the firm conviction that no entities of this world can have any locus standi on 
the spiritual plane. It should also be possible to devise an infinite variety of 
forms and processes of worship based on such conviction. But if the conviction 
were acted up to under those forms, would it help us to get rid of our present 
doubts and difficulties? Our unbiased reason should hold out no hope of any 
such possible consummation. But if once it could be rationally admitted that 
the process has the sanction of Godhead we would have no further objection to 
it even on the rationalistic grounds. In other words it is not sufficient for 
any form of worship to be rationalistic in the conditioned sense. The 
rational instinct itself requires that there must be a Supernatural sanction, not 
for reinforcing the rational but, for endowing it with the substantive 
spiritual value. Human emotion is as much a mundane phenomenon as human 
reason; and, therefore, the mere addition of human emotion to an imperfectly 
rational process, will not make the function a religious practice even in the 
rational sense. 

It should, therefore, be possible for a human being to gain the goal of spiritual 
endeavour only by the pursuit of a scriptural process. But what is this goal 
in itself ? Sree Chaitanya's conduct shows that it consists partly of the 
realization of the categorical difference that separates the mundane from the 
spiritual. This realization is effected by the momentary vision of the Reality as 
He is. The vision is attained only for a moment in this life by the due 
performance of the archana and as the supreme fulfillment of the process. 



Should the process be, therefore, continued even after the vision has been 
attained? 


The answer should be in the affirmative. It should now be possible for the 
worshipper to perform the worship in the manner that is required by the mantra. 
The mantra will now be consciously applied. But the resulting process, although 
there has been no external difference, will have been wholly changed as regards 
its significance and something more, for the worshipper. The worshipper is now 
no longer under the obligation of avoiding to exercise his mind on the 
impossible. He is now conscious of the nature of the spiritual process by reason 
of his spiritual experience. The function itself has thus become quasi-spiritual. 
After this stage has been reached it is optional for him to continue to worship the 
Archa (image ) by means of the symbols. 

Nimai Pandit gave up the method of archaha shortly after His Initiation, when 
He found it impossible to go through the process by reason, not of 
His opposition to the principle of archana but by the discovery, of His 
actual incapacity for the due performance of the valued ceremony. This point 
will be taken up again at the proper place. 

It is the fuller realization of the spiritual that is the cause of the non-attachment 
of the devotee, in the higher stages of spiritual endeavour, alike to the 
concrete and abstract forms of the mundane. The activities on the mundane plane 
are not discarded in the ordinary sense by the realization of their 
spiritual worthlessness, as the Salvationist avers. All activities are expanded by a 
change of plane into quasi-spiritual performances. The devotee in this stage 
appears to an external observer as being neither attached nor averse to mundane 
activities. But he is not found to be devoid of all interest. He is found to be 
partial to hearing and talking about Krishna and, unconditionally serving those 
who serve Krishna by the true method. 

With the change of His point of view the nature of Nimai Pandit’s normal 
Activities underwent only the corresponding alterations. The nature of 
this change is not conceivable to one who is bent upon confounding the 
spiritual with the mundane. Neither can a mere pessimist, a mere scorner of the 
things of this world, enter into the purpose of the pure devotee of Vishnu. His 
case bears a distant analogy to that of the love-lorn maiden separated from her 
sweetheart. She is not unmindful of the duties of the household on principle. But 
she cannot also avoid being unmindful. Her seemingly deliberate neglect 



of ordinary duties need not be objected to on economic and utilitarian grounds, 
in consideration of her inner condition. 


It is no part of our duty to neglect the concerns of this world any more than to be 
wholly engrossed with transitory mundane interests. Those interests have a real, 
although temporary, value during our sojourn in this world. But they are by no 
means the only interests. They need not be cultivated in the spirit that they are 
our permanent interests. They concern the perishable and changing physical 
body and mind. They can have no relation to the eternal. If the soul can subsist 
independently of the body and mind why should it be at all his duty to engage 
himself in supplying their so-called needs ? It is certainly necessary if these so- 
called duties are to be performed with the solace of any real conviction of their 
necessity for our souls, to inquire in what way, if any, they can really supply the 
needs of the soul. 

As soon as this necessity for inquiring about the needs of our soul is seriously 
experienced we drift into the process of archana by whatever name we 
may choose to designate the ensuing function. The essence of archana consists 
in seeking to do every duty of this world by a considered reference to 
the paramount needs of the soul. The attainment of such an attitude is 
practicable in this world. Otherwise there would be no way of the redemption 
of conditioned souls. The archana develops into bhajana, or actual 
spiritual service, which is the function proper of the soul and which manifests 
itself to the view of this world as a causeless hankering for association with 
Krishna involving internal dissociation from all mundane concerns. 

There is a still higher form of worship, viz., that which was exhibited by Nimai 
Pandit during the concluding twelve years of His Leela, at Puri. During that long 
period He did nothing but listen to the discourses of the Pastimes of the Divine 
Pair from the lips of His most confidential associates, Swarup Damodar and Rai 
Ramananda, in the strictest seclusion of His own private chamber. 

All stages of worship of the Absolute, that are available on the mundane plane to 
conditioned souls, are of the nature of the unrealized quest of the Absolute. 

It is never possible, so long as the mortal coil persists, to know Krishna as He is. 
If it had been possible to know Him in that way the function would 
be substantively eternal. Nimai Pandit was apprised of this by the actual vision 
of the Object of worship. It had made Him realize that it is not possible to 



serve Krishna by the method of archana laid down in the Scriptures and that it 
is really impossible to serve Godhead on the mundane plane. The method 
of archana undoubtedly possesses the merit of being the legitimate form of 
endeavour, available on this mundane plane the conditioned souls by the Grace 
of Godhead, for realizing the spiritual service of Krishna in Sree Brindavana, 
the eternal Realm of the Divinity. But the archana is nevertheless only an 
endeavour for realization; it is not the realized service. 

The more strongly and fully this unbridgeable gulf that thus effectively separates 
archana from bhajana is realized by the endeavouring soul, one is bound to lose 
in proportion his confidence in the method of archana. The realization comes to 
him in the shape of the sense of utter inadequacy and impropriety of the 
available method. In other words, one does not become more sensuous, but one 
realizes that no form of activity, possible on this mundane plane, can possess the 
substantive spiritual nature of the Divine service proper. Such a person must still 
continue to retain his regard for archana, but he is unable to be satisfied by 
merely remaining on the steps of the ladder by lacking the means of the 
performance of the actual service of his Beloved. 

It is this mood that has been termed ‘bipralambha’ by the Acharyyas who are 
self-realized, practicing, authorized teachers of the pure substantive 
eternal function. The word ‘bipralambhd means the Mood of Separation from 
one’s only Beloved. Godhead can be fully served on the mundane plane only by 
the growing realization of one’s utter separation from Him. This is the sine qua 
non of the Teaching of Nimai Pandit. It is from after His initiation that He began 
to practice this hitherto unrevealed form of the religion of pure devotion. 

Those, who consciously exhibit by the manipulation of their external conduct 
that they are actuated by the mood of separation, commit the blunder 
of supposing that they possess the thing, which alone it is certainly desirable 
to have. Any real manifestation of genuine self contradiction of this kind in 
the conduct of a person who is actually distraught with the uncontrollable 
anguish of separation from the Divinity, need not also be willfully undervalued. 
The condition of the loyal, loving wife is certainly to be preferred to that of 
the harlot. If it is not possible to serve Krishna really on the mundane plane, 
one, who desires to serve Him at all, should show his sincerity by submitting 
to undergo the preliminary training, in the form of the archana and must 
patiently and loyally wait for the realization of his desire when he is actually 
lifted to the higher plane by the grace of Godhead by His own promise recorded 



in the scriptures. 

But for the sincere soul there can be no meaning in simulating a condition 
simply because it resembles, in its external feature, that of Nimai Pandit. If 
one goes into the streets weeping and crying aloud the Name of ‘Krishna’ such 
an act should be discouraged by all means. If such a person is really actuated 
by the bona fide sense of separation from Godhead, he should be expected 
to exhibit his mood only to his confidential sympathizers, as Nimai Pandit 
took care to do. Nimai Pandit realized that the whole world is steeped in 
atheism, and that, therefore, it would be crying in the wilderness to ask them to 
listen to the tale of His woes. Notwithstanding all this precaution and 
apprehension, He could not always control His real sentiments. But whenever 
He chose to exhibit them openly, they only served to strengthen the general 
misconceptions against Krishna. They were so utterly opposed to the method of 
archana enjoined by the Scriptures that nobody, who was not himself very far 
advanced on the path of spiritual endeavour, could be expected to understand 
what it really was. It was only Sribas Pandit who could recognize in it the very 
highest form of devotion and accordingly proposed that Nimai Pandit might be 
pleased to perform the sankirtana of Krishna in his court-yard where all the 
Vaishnavas would join the holy function and from where all other persons would 
be excluded. 

The Scriptures reveal Krishna through the medium of language. The sadhu 
reveals Krishna through his spoken words and every activity. But the 
spoken Word is the Source of all Manifestations of Krishna on the mundane 
plane. The Name of Krishna is the Supreme, All-sufficing, Spoken Word. The 
Name of Krishna is identical with Krishna and possesses all the Powers of 
Krishna. The Name of Krishna has greater Potency than any other form of 
divine manifestation. The person, who can utter the Name of Krishna without 
offense, is the purest of sadhus. By the service of the best of sadhus one 
acquires eligibility for uttering the Name of Krishna without offense. The only 
method of serving the pure sadhu consists in uttering the Name of Krishna 
without offense in his company. The companionship of the sadhu helps the 
realization 

of that mode of life which is free from offense against Krishna. The sole motive 
for leading such a life is to be enabled to realize Krishna in the form of 
taking His Name without offense. If one calls upon the Name of Krishna only 
once with the really sincere motive of service, he is freed from all 



worldly entanglements for good. 


This simple creed Sreebas Pandit was enabled to understand by the Mercy of 
Nimai Pandit, as embodying the complete significance of all the Scriptures. 

The conditioned soul can only try to sincerely call upon the Name of Krishna. If 
he wants to do anything else, he is bound to go astray. He is in utter need 
of receiving all enlightenment from Krishna. The sense of this supreme 
need makes itself felt in its truly effective form only to the person who is 
sincerely desirous of leading a life of which the sole object is to conduce to the 
Pleasure of Krishna. Such a life is made available for the conditioned soul by the 
grace of the sadhu who has himself attained the same position. The need for the 
grace of the sadhu is, therefore, the fundamental fact in the method by which 
spiritual enlightenment is to be sought by the conditioned soul. 

The sadhu is not a denizen of this phenomenal world. The conditioned soul is 
not a sadhu. The redeemed soul is, indeed, a sadhu . But the process 
of redemption does not mean that the physical body and mental body of 
the conditioned soul are turned thereby into spiritual essences. There is 
no transformation of the mundane into spiritual. Just as the pure soul is liable 
to be enveloped by the double casing of the physical body and mental sheathe 
on attainment of the conditioned state, in like manner the redeemed soul finds 
his material casings in their turn capable of being coated or saturated with 
the substantive principles of spiritual cognition and bliss. This is in perfect 
keeping with our experience of the known phenomenon of the conditioned state. 
If the conditioned state is possible without the necessity of changing the essence 
of the soul, the redeemed state should also be possible without transforming 
the material casings. 

But the sadhu has no material casings at all. The redeemed soul resembles a 
sadhu in his function inasmuch as he is in a position to render his service to the 
Supreme Lord unhampered by the presence of his actual material coverings. The 
sadhu is the soul himself without the encumbrance of material coverings. But the 
sadhu appears to the vision of conditioned souls in the guise of the possessor of 
material cases. Or rather the form of the sadhu to the view of the mundane 
spectator, i.e., the conditioned soul, appears to be like the material case. If it be 
asked how the conditioned soul can at all see those material cases if the sadhu 
really has them not, the answer is that whatever the conditioned soul is permitted 
to see with his material eyes appears to him like material casing. No mortal eye 
is permitted to see the agent of Godhead as he really is. 



Let us have recourse to a mundane analogy for avoiding any possible 
misunderstanding of this all-important point. If a live tiger could find his 
way into the bioscopic show, the spectators should have no cause to suspect 
that there is any material difference in the show by his appearance, unless, 
indeed, the tiger chooses to come out of the picture to prove to the spectators that 
he is really no part of the painted show. But if the tiger is content to behave as 
a harmless actor inside the show, no spectator need suspect that he is not 
the painted picture of the live animal. This impression of the spectators, 
however bona fide it may be, will be still in flat contradiction to the real fact, 
provided the tiger is actually the live animal instead of being the show that he 
looks. 

The sadhu possesses the power of entering into the bioscopic show of this world 
in order to come within the range of the ocular vision of mundane spectators, 
without being really a part of the show. This is the real nature of the appearance 
of the sadhu on this mundane plane. His visible body is not any product of this 
phenomenal world any more than the body of the tiger is painted show. What 
appears to the mundane spectator as the physical body of the sadhu , is not the 
picture in the show, although it resembles the same to his view, but the form of 
the soul. The least gesture of the form of the soul is, therefore, a spiritual event. 
This can be known to the spectator only if he is inclined to submit to the sadhu 
for being initiated into the otherwise impenetrable secret. 

There are no doubt lots of bogus persons who are passing themselves off as 
sadhus , as an easy way of gratifying their sensuous appetites at the expense 
of their victims. But the undoubted existence of the bogus Sadhu can be 
no rational cause for disbelieving, the existence of the real sadhu . The 
bogus sadhu does not practice the service of Godhead, nor does he propose to 
teach his disciple the same. The bogus sadhu cannot teach his pupil the conduct 
that is enjoined by the Scriptures in regard to one who is anxious to attain to 
the spiritual service of Godhead. One who is anxious to find the genuine sadhu 
, however, can never go astray. The only thing that a person is required 
for finding the bona fide sadhu is to be true to himself. If one is insincere he has 
no chance of finding the sadhu and has to thank only himself for his 
dire misfortune. 

If it be asked how an insincere person can be made sincere, the reply should be 
that no one is altogether insincere. It is not possible for a person to have a 
thing for which he possesses no aptitude. Everyone has got the faculty in an 



explicit or latent form. One is only asked to exercise the function in its full 
measure. The appeal of the sadhu is made to the higher nature of every person, 
which is fully sincere. The higher nature is deluded into supposing that it is the 
same as the lower nature which also is found in every person. It is the function 
of the sadhu to impress upon all persons that the one is categorically different 
from the other and to insist that the lower nature should be made to occupy 
a position of subordination to the higher. The sadhu says in effect to the 
insincere person, “You are really sincere, as you possess the higher nature. You 
have become insincere by supposing that you have an obligation to your 
lower nature. Any indulgence of your lower nature is partial or total denial of 
your obligation to the higher nature. The higher should be allowed to dictate 
your duty to the lower nature, and not vice versa. It is, therefore, your only duty 
to be true to your higher nature. Your higher nature has got no other 
function than to serve the Absolute. It is in a position to do so even by the 
resources of your lower nature when the latter happens unavoidably to be in his 
way. But it is possible, nay normal, for your higher nature to refuse to take any 
help of the lower, in serving the Absolute. It is also possible for your higher 
nature, z'.e., your soul, to compel the lower, z'.e., the physical body and mind, to 
be employed in the service of the Absolute during his temporary sojourn in 
this world.” 

The insincere man may, indeed, pretend to hold that inasmuch as the service of 
the Absolute is only open to the higher nature, who is perfectly sincere, it can be 
no business of a person who is insincere to bother about the service of Godhead. 
The weak point of such contention is brought out when we remember that the 
function of denying the higher nature would be impossible except by connivance 
of the higher nature himself. Such obstinacy of the insincere person is, therefore, 
nothing short of a gross and deliberate suicidal folly on the part of the soul. Of 
course it is open to the soul to choose to commit suicide and to say wrongly that 
he is being compelled to do so. But as a matter of fact there is and can be no 
necessity for insincerity. The most hardened sinner can be such only by option. 
He cannot also be redeemed unless he chooses similarly to be a really consenting 
party. He can be redeemed by the sadhu only with his own consent, by the 
method of his unconditional submission to the Absolute. The sadhu enables a 
repentant sinner to obtain the strength required for such submission even in the 
otherwise impossible surroundings of this mundane world. The sadhu never asks 
for more than it is really in one’s power, by one’s sincere conviction, to give. 


Once the bona fide candidate for spiritual enlightenment finds himself in 



presence of the sadhu , he recognizes in him the transcendental guide of 
whose help he stands in such absolute need. There is no danger in making 
one’s unconditional submission to the bona fide servant of the Absolute. If one 
really seek the exclusive service of the Truth one finds the person who is capable 
of instructing him in His service. The teacher of the Absolute is incapable 
of deceiving any person. He may find it necessary to advise an insincere person 
to shun the society of insincere persons by any pretext that may tend to 
aggravate the malady. But the sadhu is never the enemy of any person. This 
is instinctively realized by all who are themselves sincerely engaged in the 
quest of the eternal service of the Absolute. When the candidate for spiritual 
service is enabled to be really established on the path of the Absolute by the 
causeless grace of the pure devotee, he is liable to be set upon by all the deluding 
forces of the limiting energy for pulling him down to the mundane plane if he 
is found to cherish any lurking insincerity. If he stands the test he is also cured 
of his worldly hankering and assured of unhampered progress on the path 
of divine service. The crisis of his life naturally makes the 
neophyte extraordinarily sensitive to the dangers of his position and makes him 
properly enough desirous of avoiding all association with non-sadhus lest he 
be misguided by their advice. The new experience is nothing less than the 
sudden revelation to the spiritual consciousness of the neophyte of his 
relationship to the Absolute which makes him realize the function of serving 
Krishna as the only thing needful. The Sight of Krishna excites an unpreventible 
disposition for His service which is recognized as the summum bonum. 
Thenceforward the only function of the awakened soul resolves itself into a 
sleepless endeavour for retaining and augmenting his newborn attachment to the 
Lotus Feet of Krishna. 

There is a real danger of losing one’s attachment to Krishna as long as the 
physical cases continue to be in one’s way. By their means it is 
always practicable to cultivate the contrary disposition of seeking one’s own 
sensuous gratification from the things of this world. The presence of the two 
material bodies is also an effective bar in the way of all access to the substantive 
plane of the Absolute. The service, that it is possible for the redeemed soul to 
render while he still continues to retain the entanglements of his material cases, 
is probationary service under the unconditional guidance of the sadhu . 

The whole duty of such a soul consists in obeying the sadhu. Krishna has, 
indeed, been seen by the grace of the sadhu , but the vision is not capable of 
being retained till Krishna is pleased to divest the soul of his mortal coils. 

The memory, however, persists by the grace of the sadhu. If the service of the 



sadhu is relaxed the memory about Krishna also tends to lose its spiritual 
significance. It is only by the continuous and exclusive service of the sadhu that 
one has any chance of retaining the memory of the divine event. If there is no 
real memory there can be no real relationship with the Absolute. No amount of 
punctilious observance of external conduct can restore to one’s activities the 
spiritual character when once the tie of living memory is snapped. 

The sadhu cannot be served in the way in which a person of this world is said to 
be served. The sadhu is a transcendental person. He can be served only on the 
transcendental plane. He is not served by the mundane aptitude of his service- 
holder. This is the meaning of the Scriptural dictum that it is only by the method 
of unconditional obedience that the sadhu has to be served. The way, in which 
the sadhu requires to be served and is actually served by his disciples, cannot for 
this reason be at all understood by the uninitiated. Empiricists may think that 
they are justified in adversely criticizing the perfectly pure conduct of the 
devotee from the angular point of view of their mundane plane. They are apt to 
think that if the devotee really belongs to the transcendental plane, his conduct 
would be of an extraordinary kind and would also appear as such to all mundane 
spectators. Empiricists expect miracles and are prepared to serve only persons 
who are able to gratify their atheistical demands. But the devotee of Krishna 
lives above all expectations and performances of the worldling. It is no part of 
his business to seek to satisfy any expectations of any mundane person. It is the 
only duty of the worldling to try to understand in a spirit of humility and 
reverence why the sadhu claims to be able to serve the Absolute without having 
to perform miracles that alone are claimed to be recognized as spiritual 
manifestation by unbelievers. 

When Sree Krishna-Chaitanya did nothing but cry for the Sight of Krishna, after 
He had been initiated into the transcendental service of Godhead by the grace of 
Sree Iswara Puri, His contemporary worldly spectators affected to regard His 
conduct to be absolutely sterile and wholly below the mark of their fanciful 
theories of the spiritual function. They could have been mystified by the 
manifestation of miraculous powers and some would have fallen at His Feet for 
obtaining ‘boons ’ in the shape of extended scope for the gratification of 
their sensuous appetites. But all were sadly disappointed when they discovered 
that the Conduct of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya did not offer the least prospect of 
their worldly advancement. They turned into relentless opponents of the Lord 
when they found out later that the teachings of Sree Chaitanya were necessarily 
most radically opposed to their own cherished supposed interests and 



convictions. 


Those who hold the view that the practice of spiritual service of Sree Krishna is 
conducive of social, political or physio communal welfare (?), betray 
utter ignorance of the nature of the elementary principles of the function of the 
soul in the state of grace. Social, political or so-called personal welfare, can be 
the cry only of those who are actually in a state of want. The soul in his 
spiritual essence is self-satisfied. He requires no external condition for the 
perfection or augmentation of his happiness. To the pure soul the proposal of 
being made happy would be as unacceptable as that of being rendered unhappy. 
He covets neither. He has no reason to covet them even if he could know, 
because he is eternally located on a plane to which those considerations are 
absolutely foreign and inapplicable. The boatman of the fable conceived the 
ridiculous ambition of spreading prospective quilts on the thorny banks of the 
river when he would become a king in order that his bare feet might no longer be 
hurt in the process of tugging at the line of his boat. He could not imagine that 
it would not be necessary at all for him to pull at the line on actually becoming 
a real king. The amenities coveted by the conditioned soul refer only to 
the mundane plane and the adventitious material casings. The soul, when he 
is really free from those casings, has nothing to do with any physico- 
mental prospect offered by the mundane world. The real problem of the 
conditioned soul is located beyond the limited outlook of his fettered mental 
understanding. The problem for the conditioned soul is one of finding a method 
of realizing the inconceivable function of the unfettered soul. If the soul has no 
physical body nor limited mind, if he has, therefore, no mundane wants, in 
what manner could it be possible for him to be occupied at all when he leaves off 
his mortal coil? It is the problem of the boatman of the fable. The boatman 
could not find the solution by scratching his head with the help of the resources 
of his actual experience. He would have been better advised to inquire of 
those who knew about the function of a real king and who were not limited to 
his unwholesome experience of a life of unedifying menial drudgery. 

If a person, after being thus admonished and after being promised good things of 
which he can have no idea till he had actually seen them with his own unsealed 
eyes, is suddenly informed that he would have lots of servants to pull at the boat¬ 
line for his pleasure and that he himself would only have to take his ease on the 
soft cushions spread inside the delicious cabin of a boat of wonderful quality, the 
boatman should no doubt be disposed to bless his extraordinary good fortune and 
be prepared to give up his own plans for the betterment of his condition, directed 



to an imaginary end. 


But if on the contrary the boatman were told in a blunt fashion that he would 
have to tug at the line of the boat that conveys Krishna on the blue waters of the 
Yamuna and would have to do so without being supplied with the amenities of 
quilts, etc., and without being allowed to quit his hold of the line for a moment, 
nor to have even the scantiest of meals after the longest intervals, should he have 
the stomach for welcoming such strange tidings so apparently contrary to all 
ideas of the prospective good fortune that he had been eternally promised with 
all the choice phrases of the mundane vocabulary? 

It is this sort of disappointment that is apt to be experienced by empiric 
expectants of transcendental enlightenment when they chance to meet the agent 
of the Absolute on this mundane plane. They have been building castles in the 
air from the moment that they were informed by the Scriptures that they are not 
physical bodies but pure souls and that the soul has no cause of unhappiness. 
Like the boatman of the fable the empiric sages, by ignorant inference from their 
mundane experiences, had proposed to themselves a condition which is to 
provide worldly amenities that would exceed their wildest demands. 

But how can any worldly amenities be of any use on the transcendental plane ? 
The happiness and unhappiness of this world are of no use at all for the soul who 
happens to be located wholly beyond their limited and temporary jurisdictions. 
The conditions on the transcendental plane are wholly and inconceivably 
different from those on the mundane. The nature of the soul in the state of grace 
is also altogether different from the disposition and outlook of the temporary 
conditioned sojourn. In such circumstances it is foolish for the conditioned soul 
to embark on fictitious speculations on his own resources, regarding the 
substantive nature of the function of the soul in the unfettered state. 

So without affecting to be undeceived by the actual conduct and words of the 
pure devotee, for the reason that they do not serve the purposes of our body and 
mind, it is necessary to turn one’s unprejudiced attention to the real significance 
of such activities. One need not bring up the resources of worldly experience for 
understanding the tidings of the transcendental plane by the method of trying to 
assimilate them to the mundane. It is not necessary to accept them for the 
purpose of gaining any worldly end that one may have in view. Such ubiquity is 
out of court in the perfectly pure atmosphere of transcendental enquiry. The 
whole position has to be accepted as it is and for good. It is necessary to try to 



become acquainted with the real nature of what is offered as our only eternal 
function, from the point of view of the soul, and not from that of the body and 
mind. 

The body and mind are satisfied only when they receive an abundance of the 
deceptive treasures of this world. The mind covets subtler forms of 
acquisitions that can no more be retained than the grosser possessions of this 
world which it looks down upon. This accumulative aptitude, for no purpose of 
the soul, is apt to be accepted as the only function of human life. But why should 
it be obligatory on anybody to take the mind at its word? Why should one not 
agree to sit for a quiet half-hour for taking stock of the permanent achievements 
of his life? Are any of our acquired million of items likely to endure? Is it 
desirable that any of them should endure? Suppose all of them could be had 
without any effort; would they be worth one’s while to have them? Or are their 
seeming values due to their being difficult to obtain and impossible to keep? Is 
not this a veritable wild goose chase from the point of view of substantive value? 
If a thing is really valuable for me, why should it tend to lose its value at all so 
long as I myself endure? 

So it is absolutely necessary to try in all sincerity to get over the habitual, but 
nevertheless abnormal, feeling of disappointment that is experienced by 
all conditioned souls when they read the accounts of the Scriptures without 
being able to understand why it should be necessary for them to desire to have 
access to a realm which seems to resemble this world in many respects but is 
unduly lauded to the skies by a comparatively small number of the most peculiar 
type of people and their equally peculiar admirers? 

The answer to their reasonable question is supplied by the Scriptures and they 
should only have the patience to question with an open mind. If they 
are prepared not to accept nor desire any merely tentative solution applicable to 
the conditions of this temporary sojourn, they are likely to find the real answer 
to their real inquiry. 

Conclusion of the Early Part of the Career of Sree Krishna-Chaitanya 
A 1 Noticed in till 


A 2 Transcendental Eternal Divine Pastime. 



tlv ^3 individual soul distinct from Godhead 



