SfHH;;;'"7!i.;ili!ii4 




: :;:Ji;i':H^;(Ijy"rSi)i?{;;!Hj:?;^i=^ih^: 




5 39 



CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 




Date Due 



im-^ - t954H 



SI 



S&:3^ 



1956 eg 



* 






WT 



R 



IN*6fet)S 



wiie i^ i* 




BL 1245.V36S39'""""^ '""'"'^ 
Chajtanya and his age / 




3 1924 022 952 695 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tiiis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924022952695 



CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 



Chaitanya and His Age 

{Ramtanu Lahiri Fellowship Lectures 
for the year 1919 and 1921) 



By 

Rai Bahadur Dinesh Chandra Sen, B.A., D.Litt., 

Fellow, Reader, and Head Examiner of the Calcutta University, Associate 

Member of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Author of History of Bengali 

Language and Literature, the Vaisnaya Literature of MediaLvai 

IBengal, Chaitanya and his Companions, Typical Selections 

from Old Bengali Literature, Polk Literature 

of Bengal, the Bengali Ramayanas, 

Banga Bhasa-0-Sahitya, 

etc, etc. 




Published by the 
UNIVERSITY OF CALCUTTA 



1922 

Lc. 



BL 



/^/cp-^ /yajT 



Printed et Atulchandra Bhattachabtta at the Calcutta 
University Press, Senate House, Calcutta 



Dedicated 

To 

The Hon'ble SIR ASUTOSH MOOKERJEE, 

Kt., C.S.I., M.A., D.L., D.Sc., Ph.D., 

F.R.A.S., F.R.S.E., F.A.S.B. 

Vice-Chancellor of the Calcutta University, 

whose resolute and heroic attempts 

to rescue our Alma Mater from destruction 

at the hour of her great peril 

may well remind us 

of the famous line of Jayadeva 

with the sincere gratitude of 
the Author 



" Hail thee O Chaitanya — the victor of my heart, 
Mark the rhythm of his mystic dance in lofty 

ecstasy — quite alone. 
Merrily sounds the tahor and the cymbal's 

note keeps time. 
The joyous band following him sing and 

dance merrily — merrily ; 
He steps a pace or two onwards in his 

dancing gait, 
And knows no rest — intoxicated with his 

own over-flowing joy. 
Oh my heart's Lord, how can I express the 

love I have for thee ? 
Saha Akbar craves a drop from the sea of thy 

piety and love." 

Song by Emperor Akbar 

(Translated from Hindi) 



PREFACE 

The first 190 pages of this book embody my 
lectures as Ramtanu Lahiri Eesearch Fellow 
for the session 1919, and the remaining portion 
is meant as my lectures for 1921, The subject 
chosen for 1920 was " The Bengali Prose Style 
from 1800 to 1857." As this subject was to be 
studied by the students of the Indian Verna- 
culars in our University for their examination, 
the urgency of its treatment required me to stop 
the Ghaitanya topics and deliver a course of 
lectures on the prose-style last year. These 
lectures were delivered and published early in 
1921. And, I next hastened to revert to iny 
half-finished lectures on Ghaitanya. There are 
some points in this book which are a repetition 
of the things said in my other books, but this 
could not be helped. As I have attempted to 
give here a complete and consistent story of the 
great hero of my memoir I had to include all 
noteworthy points of his life in a short compass. 
There are of course many things in this book 
not dealt with elsewhere and I have always 
tried to present the incidents of Chaitanya's 
life in a new light. It is hoped that the sketch 
herein presented will, by its cbmprehensive 
character, satisfy the curiosity of all students 



vi PREFACE 

who want to have a clear account of Ohaitanya, 
his religious views and of the sects that follow 
his religion. Everything said in this book is 
based on old authority, though I have not 
given references in all cases, as it would make 
the book heavy with foot-notes and more or less 
mar its popular character. The readers will 
find one and all of such references in the works 
mentioned in the bibliography given on pages 
97-98 of this book. 

One thing has struck me in regard to the 

recognition of the Vaisnavas by the Hindu 

society in general. The Goswamies of Khardah. 

and Sg.ntipur — the descendants of Nityananda 

and Adwaita respectively — not only enjoy the 

highest social rank amongst the Vaisnavas but 

have quite a respectable standing amongst the 

lay Brahmin community. My idea was that 

they created this position outside their own 

society, even after they had broken stringent 

caste-rules, through the sheer dint of their 

noble sacrifices and high spirituality. But quite 

lately a book named " Sri Nityananda-vamsavali- 

0-Sadhana" written by Pandit Kshirodbihari 

Goswami — a direct descendant of Nityananda — 

has disillusioned me on this point. I now find 

that the descendants of Mtyananda and Adwaita 

had very nearly become outcastes in the primitive 

stages of the promulgation of the Ohaitanya 

cult. .They redeemed themselves, however in 



PREFACE vii 

the eyes to the Brahmin community, outside 
their own ranks, by contriving to enter into 
frequent matrimonial alliances with the ' kulin ' 
Brahmins of the mother society, often by satis- 
fying large pecuniary demands of the latter. 
This alliance with a large number of ' kulins ' has 
gradually made their position secure in the Hindu 
society. This shews that the caste-rules amongst 
the Hindus is a factor of so great an importance 
that though the efforts of a prophet may for a time 
succeed in unloosing its hold upon our people, it 
reasserts itself with all its rigidity, a short while 
after. And, however mighty the enemy, it is only 
by manoeuvres, tactics and bribes that he can 
expect to gain his lost position in society — not 
by open war. The Sahajiyas disregard the caste- 
rules at night, fearing exposure in daylight. 
It is for this reason that some of them have 
compared themselves with bats (p. 380). 

I take this opportunity of expressing my 
hearty thanks to Dr. Sylvain Levi, the distin- 
guished Orientalist, who has kindly written a 
fore-word for this book in the form of a letter. 
The high compliments that a scholar of his 
world-wide fame has given me, have been very 
gratifying to me, as indeed they would have been 
to any Indian. There can be no question as to 
the sincerity of his appreciation, though I feel that 
there may have been a friendly bias. I regret, 
however, that my presentation of Chaitanya does 
not appear to be sufficiently indicative of the 



viii PEEFACE 



greatness of his character, and Dr. Levi Tvill 
not give him a place in the ranks of the world's 
greatest men. He refers to Ghaitanya's religion 
being restricted to a narrow geographical area 
contrasting it to that of Buddha. The universal 
recognition of the Buddha and a few other 
greatest leaders of the world in the spiritual 
domain is chiefly due to political causes, the 
advantage of which Bengal of the 16th century 
could not evidently possess. Vaisnavism of 
iBengal is, besides, the youngest of the world's 
reputed creeds, so it is perhaps premature to 
pass a judgment now on Ghaitanya's work. 
Regarding the view that the theology of 
Ghaitanya lacks originality, the codes of all 
religions of the world may be traced to earlier 
sources ; and a complicated code of Ethics 
is not, in my humble opinion, always the 
true criterion of the greatness of a faith. 
The infusion of life into the universal truths 
and their presentation in the most attractive 
form are, I submit, a far truer test. I cannot 
follow the reason that love for God is a peculiar 
or local feature of Indian religions, which cannot 
be appreciated outside India. The difference, I 
think, lies in the fact that Europe has not yet 
transcended the ethical limits, beyond which lies 
the domain of mystic felicities. Ghaitanya did not 
ignore mankind ; he tried to lead men to the dizzy 
heights of paradise, which my learned friend, 
following the limitations of Ghristian theology, 



PREFACE ir 

speaks of as "forbidden." I agree with him 
so far that Ohaitanya cannot have a universal 
recognition in this materialistic age. But I 
verily believe that when this age will be followed 
by one of spiritual awakening all over the world, 
he will be differently judged. He brought to 
the doors of ordinary men the highest spiritual 
bliss of divine love, which like the stream of the 
holy Ganges, lay entangled in the meshes of 
Indian religious philosophy, more knotty than 
the matted locks of Siva. I hope, my esteemed 
friend will not take me amiss, Asa Bengali, it 
is natural for me to be prejudiced in favour of 
my Bengali apostle. But love always sanctifies 
the soul. If I have been blind to the defects of 
Chaitanya's religious system, I do not regret it. 
I would in that case only crave my friend's 
forgiveness. Speaking for myself, my heart, 
more than to any logic, responds to the couplet 
first sung by Nityananda : 

" One who admires Chaitanya and sings 
praises of him, is dear to me as my life," 

I hold myself fully responsible for the numer- 
ous misprints and errors which will be found in 
this book, and do not accuse anybody. I am not a 
good proof-reader and that is all that I can plead 
as my excuse. 

7) YiswAKOSH Lane, \ 

' Calcutta. [ DINESH CHANDRA SEN. 

The 15th April 1922. ) 



POREWORD 

BY 

Dr. Sylvain Levi, 
mon cher ami, 

Vous m'avez demand^ une preface pour rotre 
livre : " Chaitanya et son ^poque." Je n'ai gufere 
de competence sur ce domaine ; ce que j'en 
ooanais, je le dois essentiellment a vos ouvrages : 
depuis le jour ou j'ai lu avec une emotion 
inoubliable voire " Histoire de la Langue et de la 
Litt6rature Beagalie " j'ai suivi avec un int^ret 
qui ne s'est jamais ralenti votre activity si 
f^conde, et 'cest ainsi que, gr&ce a vous, le 
Bengale du temps de Chaitanya m'est devenu 
familier. J'avais eu pourtant I'occasion d'effleur- 
er le sujet il y a tr^s longtemps, au d^but de 
mes etudes. Je commengais a recueillir des 
mat^riaux en vue de ma thfese sur le Thelltre 
Indien ; j'avais trouv^ a la Biblioth^que Nationale 
a Paris, un vieux manuscrifc en Venture bengalie 
qui contenait le traite de Rupa Gosvamia sur 
I'art dramatique (natya) ; je f us frapp6 par la 
ferveur de cet ^crivain qui greffait sur un recueil 
de definitions banales une longue suite d'hymnes 



xii FOREWORD 

enthousiastes a Krishna; ce fut pour moi I'occasion 
de m'initier au mouvement inspire par Ohaitanya. 
Je lus ensuite, avec une surprise et une admira- 
tion que je retrouve encore apr^s tant d'ann^es, 
le drame original et puissant oti Kavikarnapura 
met audacieusement en sc^ne Chaitanya et ses 
compagnons. J'ai longtemps r6v6 d'en donner 
une traduction parallMement a celle du Prabodha- 
chandrodaya, pour mettre en contraste Ting^nio- 
sit6 raffin^e de I'un et la fougue passionn^e de 
I'autre. J'ai traduit le Prabodhachandrodaya, et 
jai dA m'en tenir la, faute de temps. Je sais gr6 
a votre livre de me ramener vers le h^ros que 
j'avais trop n6glig6, et de me le montrer dans une 
intensity de lumifere qui laisse par instants les 
yeux un peu eblouis. 

Vous poss6dez a un degre extraordinaire le 
don capital de I'historien, qui est de projeter la vie 
sur le pass6 mort. O'est un don de pofete autant 
que d'historien, et vous etes si essentiellement 
polte que votre style oscille entre l'6popee et le 
lyrisme. Ce besoin de vie que vous portez en 
vous ne vous permet pas de vous arrfeter a ces 
froides combinaisons de possibilit^s qui sont 
partout le fond de I'histoire et dans I'lnde plus 
que partout ailleurs. La p^nurie des documents 
positifs y laisse a chaque instant I'historien 
embarrass^ pour rattacher dans une continuite 
provisoire la s6rie des faits connus. Vous ne 
pouvez pas vous resigner a cette attitude 



FOREWORD xiii 

d'expectative. Vous faites resolument la part 
de Timpossible ; mais cette discrimination une 
fois operee, le possible glisse aiseraent au 
probable, et le probable au certain. 

C'est la un effet fatal de votre imagination 
fougueuse. Pourtant vous n'etes pas sans 
connattre ni reconnaitre les exigences de la plus 
s6v^re critique, vous 6puisez tous les documents 
avec la patience d'un ^rudit, et vous pressez 
vos 6tudiants avec une eloquence pathetique 
de rechercher les documents encore inMits. 
Si i'etais plus jeune, j'aurais voulu vous suivre 
et je ne doute pas, pour I'honneur du Bengale 
que vos appels soient accueillis avec empresse- 
ment par la jeunesse studieuse. Une figure 
comme Chaitanya merite les hommages d'un 
pays entier ; il est juste que les savants lui 
consacrent leurs veilles, comme les paysans 
lui consacrent leurs chants. 

Je suis assez dispose (et j'ai tort peut-etre) 
a faire bon marche de sa theologie qui m'ap- 
parait plutdt iudifferente et de seconde main, 
sans puissance d'invention ou de syst^me ; 
ses autres qualit^s, d'orateur, de po6te, de 
lingiuste, etc., n'auraient pas suffi a le mettre 
hors de pair, Mais ce que donne a sa personnalite 
un relief unique, c'est le don d'amour qu'il a su 
porter jusqu'a I'extreme limite des possibilites 
humaines, en le tournant tout entier sur Krishna, 
et qui s'est associ^ spontanement chez lui a la 



xiv FOREWORD 

beauts cr^atrice de I'art. Sa conception de la 
danse, appliqu^e a la propagande de 1' amour divin 
auraitseduitl'esth^tique delicate de la Grfece ; elle 
aurait sans doute plac6 Chaitanya a c6te d'Orphee. 
Q.u'il y ait eu, dans ses transes mystiques, 
un element maladif , vous ne le contestez pas ; 
vous citez un de ses propos ou il parle lui-meme 
de ses attaques d'epilepsie. Mais cette faiblesse 
m^me me plait ; elle est la part de la " bete," pour 
reprendre les termes si expressifs de Pascal, 
chez un etre oii la part de " I'ange " est si belle. 
Je sens, ehez ce sannydsi ivre d'amour, la sourde 
lutte sans cesse d^chain6e, et qui le jette a terre, 
^cumant, au milieu des visions qui lui decou- 
vraient un monde interdit. 

Vous avez vous-meme, en plus d'un passage, 
6voqu6 par comparaison la figure du Bouddha, 
cet autre h6ros indien de I'amour universel. 
Mais j'ai peur que votre passion devote et pres- 
que fanatique pour Chaitanya vous ait rendu 
un peu injuste h. regard de son grand rival. 
Vous aimez a insister sur I'cBuvre sociale de 
fraternite humaine courageusement poursuivie 
et en partie r6alis6e par le missionnaire de 
Krishna; vous vous plaisez a montrer les 
Musulmans ou les Musulmanises ad mis dans son 
^glise, et vous gloriflez I'esprit de " catholicite " 
qui anime sa predication, Ici, je le declare 
francheraent, je ne puis vous suivre. Vous 
pourrez mettre en cause, et peut-^tre avec raison, 



FOREWORD 



XV 



mes preventions d'Oceidental ; mais le respect 
absolu du sens 6tabli pour les mots qu'on em- 
ploie est la condition primordiale d'une discussion, 
si on la veut loyale et utile, et dans le cas present, 
comme partout et toujours, la justesse du mot est 
solidaire avec la justesse de I'id^e. Le terme 
de " catholicity," quand il ne d^signe pas par 
excellence tons les fiddles de I'Eglise Oatb clique, 
garde le sens qu'il tient de son origine grecque, 
ind6pendamment du sufl&xe latin qui s'y est 
accroch^ ; il signifie a peu pr6s I'universalite, le 
monde pris "dans son ensemble" (koB' oXov), Dans 
I'immensite presque infinie de I'histoire reli- 
gieuse de I'lnde, si riche en personnalites et en 
creations, le Bouddha est uniquement et exclusive- 
ment le seul a propos de qui on puisse employer 
ce terme. Que sa notion personnelle de 1' homme 
ait d6passe les frontiferes de I'lnde pour s'^tendre 
aussi loin que oelle d'un Socrate ou d' un J^sus, 
rien ne nous permefc soit de raflS.rmer, soit de le 
nier. Mais le fait est que I'Eglise n6e de son 
inspiration a convert! la plus grande partie de 
I'Asie. Aucune autre croyance originaire de 
rinde, orthodoxe ou h6r6tique,n'aconnuce succ^s. 
Vous avez recueilli pieusemeat de 16gers indices 
qui vous permettent de supposer que 1' influence 
de Chaitanya a d6pass6 les frontiSres du Bengale, 
Orissa compris ; en r^alit^ le raouvement de 
Chaitanya est regional, tr^s loin d' 6tre " catho- 
lique", autrement dit : universellement humain. 



xvi FOREWORD 

L'Inde, a coup sAr, a le droit de ' se coraplaire 
dans son "splendide isolement," comme d'autres 
peuples se sont flatus de le faire ; mais elle doit 
alors loyalement accepter les restrictions qui en 
d^coulent. Le g6nie hell^nique et le g^nie 
h6braique ont con9u 1' homme universel, I'un 
dans I'ordre philosophique, I'autre dans I'ordre 
religieux : ils out tendu de tous leurs efforts a le 
r^aliser, et ils y ont prodigieusement reussi. 
L'Inde a pr^tendu limiter son horizon au cadre 
nettement d6fini de ses frontiers naturelles, 
elle a d61ib6r6ment ignore le reste du monde. 
Elle s'est fa9onn6, elle a jtnaintenu un type 
d' organisation religieuse et sociale qui vise a 
I'exclusion rigoureuse de 1' stranger. La faillite 
ultime du bouddhisme dans I'lnde est le triomphe 
supreme du nationalisme hindou; les seuls 
liens qui rattachaient V Inde a la grande com- 
munaut6 humaine ^taient d6finitivement 
an^antis. Ohaitanya peut etre un des plus 
grands voyants de I'lnde; 1' humanity ne le 
reclame pas comme un de ses grands hommes ; 
elle ne le reconnalt point, parcequ'il I'a 
m6connue. 



Katmtjndtj, 
Nepal, 29 Juin 1922. 



FOREWORD 

BY 

Dr. Stlvain Levi. 

(Translated from French by Captain J. W. Petavel, R.E., Eetired, 
Lecturer on che Poverty Problem, Calcutta TTniversity and Principal, 
Maharaja of Kasimbazar's Polytechnic Institute.) 

Dr. Dinesh Chandra Sen. 

Dear friend, 

You have asked me for a preface for your 
book " Chaitanya and his Age " but I am hardly 
qualified to give it, for what I know of the sub- 
ject I owe mainly to your works. From the 
day when with feelings I shall never forget, I read 
your History of Bengali Language and Litera- 
ture, I have followed your fruitful activity with 
a degree of interest that has never diminished, 
and thus, thanks to you, Bengal of the time of 
Chaitanya has become familiar to me. I had, 
however, skimmed through the subject a long 
time ago in the early days of my studies, when I 
was collecting notes for my work on the Indian 
theatre. I had found in the '\6ibliotheque 
Nationale ' an old manuscript in Bengali script 



xviii FOREWORD 

that contained the treatise of Rupa Goswami on 
dramatic art (Natya). I was struck by the 
enthusiasm of the writer who grafted on a com- 
pilation of commonplace definitions a long series 
of fervent hymns to Krishna. 

That put me first into touch with the 
movement inspired by Chaitanya. Subse- 
quently I read with a degree of surprise and 
admiration that I experience again after these 
many years, the original and powerful drama in 
which Kavi Karnapur boldly brought Chaitanya 
and his companions on to the stage. I long 
cherished the ambition to give a translation of 
it by the side of that of the Prabodh Chandro- 
daya, to emphasise the contrast between the 
refined ingenuity of the one and the passionate 
ardour of the other. I managed to translate 
Prabodh Chandrodaya but was compelled to stop 
there as I had no time to do more. I must be 
thankful to your book for having brought me 
back towards the hero I have neglected, and for 
having shown him to me in intense light that 
at times dazzles one's eyes. 

You possess in an extraordinary degree the 
capital gift of the historian which is to make 
the dead past live. It is a poet's gift as much 
as a historian's, and you are so essentially a poet 
that your style alternates between the lyric and 
the epic. This instinctive desire to make things 
living that is characteristic of you, does not 



t'ORBWOEi) 



XIX 



allow you to be stopped over the cold study 
of possibilities that is everywhere the foundation 
of the historian's work, and especially so in 
India. The lack of authoritative documents 
leaves the Indian historian constantly puzzled to 
link known facts together in some degree of 
continuity. You cannot resign yourself to the 
expectant attitude. You resolutely make the 
best of an impossible situation, but once your 
choice made, speculation glides unperceptibly 
into probability, and probability into certainty. 
This is the inevitable result of your fervent 
imagination. Nevertheless you do not fail to 
appreciate and to recognise the requirements of 
the most severe criticism (you do not lose your 
critical faculty). You examine all the documents 
with the perseverance of the patient scholar, and 
appeal to your students with touching eloquence 
to seek for manuscripts still unpublished. If I 
were younger, I would have wished to follow you, 
and I have no doubt that, for the honour of Bengal, 
your appeal will be taken up enthusiastically by 
her studious youth. Such a figure as Chaitanya 
deserves the homage of the whole country. 
It is right that the learned should honour him by 
burning their midnight oil studying him, as the 
peasants honour him by consecrating their songs 
to him. I am quite inclined (though perhaps 
I am wrong) to think less of his theology, which 
seems to me rather indifEerent and second-hand 



xi fOREWOllD 

not showing power of invention or method. His 
other qualities as an orator, as a poet, as a 
linguist, etc., woiild not seem to me suflBLcient 
to make him without an equal. But that 
which marks him as an outstanding perso- 
nality is the gift of love that he has been able 
to carry to the extreme limits of human capa- 
city centering it entirely upon Krishna, and 
which his disposition caused him to associate 
spontaneosly with the creative beauty of 
art. His conception of dance applied to the 
propaganda of divine love, would have appealed 
to the fine aesthetic sense of the ancient Greeks 
and would no doubt have given Chaitanya 
a place by the side of Orpheus. That there was 
in his mystic trances an abnormal element you 
do not contest. You indeed quote one of the 
passages where he himself speaks of his epileptic 
fits. But even this weakness is pleasing to me. 
We see in it the manifestation of the " animal - 
side " of man, to use Pascal's expressive language, 
in a being in whom the manifestation of the 
" angel-side " is so beautiful. I feel that silent 
strife going on incessantly in this sanyasi, 
intoxicated with love, and occasionally throwing 
him down foaming at the mouth in the midst 
of his vision that has revealed a forbidden 
paradise to him. 

You have yourself, in more than one passage, 

compared him to the Buddha— this other Indian 

'hero of universal love. But, I am afraid, your 



FOREWORD xxi 

J)assionate and somewhat fanatical devotion to 
Ghaitahya has made you a little unjust towards 
his great rival. You like to insist on the social 
work of human brotherhood courageously pur- 
sued, and partly realised, by the missionary 
of Krishna. You delight in showing the 
Musalmans or converts to Islam admitted into 
his church, and you glorify the " catholic " spirit 
that characterises his preachings. Here I 
frankly declare that I cannot follow you. You 
may urge, and perhaps justly, my limitations 
as a Westerner, but an absolute regard for the 
accepted meanings of words that one uses is the 
primary condition of frank and useful discussion, 
and in the present case, as everywhere and always, 
the accuracy of the word is one and the same 
with the accuracy of idea. The word catholi- 
city, when it is not used to designate the followers 
of the Catholic Church, keeps its meaning 
derived from the Greek origin, independently of 
the Latin suffix that has been attached to 
it. It signifies almost universality — the world 
approximately as a whole. In the almost un- 
fathomable depths of India's religious history, so 
rich in personalities, both real and imaginary, the 
Buddha stands alone, as the one in connection 
with whom the term can be used. There is 
nothing to justify us either in affirming or deny- 
ing that his particular conception of mankind 
has passed the limits of India to extend as far 



xxii FOREWORD 

as the ideas of Socrates or Jesus extended. But 
the fact is that the church that his inspiration 
brought into existence has won the greater 
part of Asia. No other faith originating in 
India, orthodox or heterodox, has ever succeeded 
in doing that. You have carefully gathered 
together and treasured slight indications that 
allow you to think that the influence of 
Chaitanya has passed the limits of Bengal and 
Orissa. As a matter of fact, the Chaitanya- 
movement is local, far from being " Catholic," 
i.e., in other words, universally human. India 
has certainly the right to take pride in her 
splendid isolation, just as, indeed, some other 
countries have chosen to do. But then she must 
frankly accept the limitations which accompany 
such an attitude. The genius of the Greeks and 
of the Hebrews conceived humanity as a whole ; 
the former conceived man in the domain of 
philosophy, and the latter in that of religion. 
They tried with all their efforts to realise that ideal, 
and attained prodigious success. India has had 
the ambition of limiting her horizon within clearly 
defined natural boundaries. She had deliberately 
ignored the rest of the world. She created 
for herself, and has maintained, a kind of religious 
and social organisation the object of which 
is strictly to exclude foreigners. The ulti- 
mate failure of Buddhism in India is the 
supreme triumph of Hindu nationalism. The 



FOREWORD xxiii 

only links that connected India with the rest of 
the great human family were finally destroyed. 
Chaitanya may be one of the greatest seers of 
India. Humanity, however, does not recognise 
him as one of its great men. He did not 
recognise mankind. So mankind does not 
recognise him. 

Khatmund, 
27th June, 1922. 



Contents 

CHAPTER I. 

Condition of Bengal before the advent of 

Chaitanya (pp. 1-57). 

(i) Vices brought on by reaction against Bud- 
dhist asceticism (pp. 1-14); (**) Ohandidas 
as precursor of Chaitanyaic age (pp. 14-31); 
(in) the influence of the Bhagavata and 
other sacred works (pp. 31-37) ; (w) Vaisna- 
vism in Bengal before Chaitanya (pp. 87-52)j 
(v) the political condition of the period 
(pp. 52-57). 

^ CHAPTER II. 

A historical review of the biographical works 
of the Vaisnavas — their claims to reliability 
discussed (pp. 68-98). 

(a) Murari Gupta's Chaitanya Charitam 
(pp. 58-67). 

(6) Narahari Sarkar's songs (pp. 68-73). 

(c) The Chaitanya Bhagavata (pp. 73-77). 

(d) The Chaitanya Charitamrita (pp. 77-81). 
(e), Lochan Das's Chaitanya Mangal (pp. 

81-85). 

(/) Goyinda Das's Karcha (pp. 85-89). 

iff) Jayananda's Chaitanya Mangal (pp. 
89-91). 



XXVI CONTENTS 

(h) Prembilas, Bhakti Ratnakar and songs 
on Chaitanya (pp. 92-93), 

(*) Summary (pp. 93-97) Bibliography (pp. 
97-98). 

CHAPTER III. 
Ancestry, birth and childhood (pp. 99-108). 

CHAPTER IV. 

Birth and boyish frivolities (pp. 109-112) ; 

education and founding of a T61 (pp. 113-119) ; 

the defeat of the Scholar Keshub Kashmiri 
(pp. 119-121). 

CHAPTER V. 

Marriage (pp. 121-124); Tour in Eastern 
Bengal (pp. 124-127) ; Return to home (p, 127) ; 
Visit to Gya (pp. 128-130) ; Trances (pp. 130- 
135) ; Closing of the T61 (pp. 135-138) ; The 
Sankirtan parties (pp. 138-153) ; Reformation 
of Jagai and Madhai (pp. 153-156) ; Srikrishna 
play (pp. 156-167) ; His resolve to turn a san- 
nasyi (pp. 157-163). 

CHAPTER VI. 

Chaitanya's Sannyas (pp. 164-167) ; His 
tour and visit to Santipur (pp. 167-176) ; The 
incidents at Puri (pp. 176-189); His resolve to 
go to the Deccan (pp. 189-190), 



CONTENTS XXvii 

CHAPTER VII. 

Govinda Das's account of his travel (pp. 191- 
194) ; Reformation of Sinners — Naroji, Bhila- 
pantha and Bara Mukhi (pp. 194 to 208). 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Visit to Travancore and other places (pp. 209- 
212) ; Reception at Puri (pp. 212-216). 

CHAPTER IX. 

Proposed visit to Brindavan (pp. 216-218) ; 
Interview with Sanatan and Rupa — their 
Sanyas (pp. 219-323) ; Private tour, — Baladev's 
account (pp. 323-326) ; Stay at Brindavan — on 
his way back — meeting with Bijli Khan (pp. 227- 
229). 

CHAPTER X. 

Chaitanya at Benares, — discussion with 
Prakasananda (pp. 230-233) ; Tour in Bengal, 
(pp. 233-234) ; At Puri (pp. 234-250). 

CHAPTER XI. 

Reveries and ecstasies gradually increasing 
(pp. 251-259) ; His passing away (pp. 259-265). 

CHAPTER XII. 

Chaitanya as a teacher (pp. 266-319). 
Love — its various phases in the Spiritual plane 
(pp. 266-276); Service to fellowmen and 



XXVm CONTENTS 

compassion for the depressed castes (pp. 276-283); 
Social reformation — Vaisnava jurisprudence 
(pp. 283-290) ; His commanding personality, 
many-sidedness of character and scholarship 
(pp. 2P0-295) ; Spiritual emotion, love for 
mother, influence on the Vaisnava poets 
(pp. 295-319). 

Supplement 

CHAPTER I. 

Chaitanya's religious views — the Dwaita- 
dwaitabad (pp. 320-323); Rules of conduct, 
theory of devotion (pp. 324-327) ; The fivefold 
rasas of the Vaisnavas (pp. 327-333). 

CHAPTER II. 

The Sahajias (pp. 334-341) ; The various sects 
(pp. 341-351) ; The Buddhist elements (pp. 351- 
356); Their philosophy of love (pp. 356-361); 
Durgaprasad Kar— the Sahajia Sadhu practis- 
ing love (pp. 361-366) ; Their love-ideal derived 
from the Buddhists (pp. 367-370); The Mada- 
notsava (pp. 370-372) ; The Radha-Krishna cult 
(pp. 372-373) ; The wickedness of the Sahajias 
exposed in the novel Charu-Darshan (pp. 373,- 
389); The Sahajia songs (pp. 389-397). 

CHAPTER III. 

The duty of the Research-students in the 
field of the Sahajia literature (pp. 398-403). 



Chaitanya and his Age 

From Old Records 



CHAPTER I 

Condition op Bengal before the 
Advent of Chaitanya 

(«■) Vices brought on by reaction against Buddhist 

asceticism. 
(m) Chandi Das as precursor of Chaitanyaic age, 
(iii) Influence of the Bhagavata and other sacred works, 
(iv) Vaisnaivism in Bengal before Chaitanya. 
(») The political condition of the period. 



(») Vices brought on by reaction against 

Buddhist asceticism. "' 

If we take a bird's-eye view of the religious 
aspects of Bengal from the eleventh to the 
twelfth century, we shall be in a position to 
98@ertain the causes that have led to the 
developm^t o^.the &^^^inciult in this prpvinoe. 



i CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

Cbaitanya's advent has produced a far-reaching 

effect on the religious and social 
of Medtvai Bengar Wstory of Bengal, and in order 

to judge and explain how this 
could be possible, a review of the condition 
of the religious life and of the social evolution 
that was going on in this country, prior to 
the advent of Ohaitanya, is essential from many 
points of view. We shall chiefly restrict ourselves, 
however, to the evidences that have been found 
in Bengali literature for arriving at our 
conclusions. 

The Nath-cult which originated with Mina- 

Nath and Goraksha Natb had 
The Nath and ^]j.Qa,dy an extensive literature 

in Bengali in the thirteenth 
century, and there was the Dharma-cult also, 
probably co-eval with the Nath- creed and 

having many points in com- 

The common features. ^m -rw. ij. 

mon. The Dharma-cult was 
a degraded form of Buddhism, and Nathism 
was a compromise between Saivism and 
Buddhism. The followers of both the sects 
believed in ' Niranjan' and ' Dharma,' though 
the Nath-cult seems to have adhered more closely 
to Siva worship. Both believed in miracles, and 
in the supernatural powers of the Siddhas. 
Kalipa, Haripa and Kanupa, are spoken of in 
terms of high esteem in the literatures of both 
the cults, and are held in higher regard than 
even the gods of heaven. But we are not 



GORAKSHA BIJAY 3 

at present concerned with the details of the 
respective creeds. 

Nathism contributed largely to our Vernacular 
in its primitive stages, and chief among these 
contributions are the Maynamati songs presented 
to us from different parts of Bengal in manifold 
forms. These songs originated in Eastern and 
Northern Bengal and were spread by the 
propounders of the Nath-cult over all parts of 
India. If the reason is asked as to why these 
songs are to be included in the Nath-literature, 
I should say that they relate mainly to the 
glories of Goraksha Nath, the Nath-leader, and 
of Harisiddha and Maynamati, his two Bengali 
disciples. There are many incidents described 
in these songs, but the keynote to them is 
struck in the panegyrics bestowed on the power 
of the Siddhas of the Nath-cult. The form in 
which these songs have come down to us has 
been considerably modernised by the rhapsodists 
of the later ages, but the original framework is of 
the 11 th and 12th centuries, and evidences of 
this lie strewn over the whole range of this 
lyrical literature. 

But though the Maynamati songs traverse by 
far a wider field, the most strikingly significant 
note, however, of the Nath-cult is to be found 
in the Goraksha-Bijay itself— 
Goraksha Bijay. ^ Bengali work which contains 
an account of how Goraksha Nath redeemed 
his ^ru Mina Nath frond his great spiritual 



i. CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

degradation. This book is sometimes called 
the ' Mina-Chetana' or restoration of Mina 
Nath to spiritual consciousness. The tone of 
the poem is elevated and calm, and a quiet 
philosophy and spirit of stern asceticism pervade 
the work. The doctrines of Yoga as practised 
by the Naths are discussed here in the 
* Sandhya-bhanho,' or 'the language of twilight' 
as it has been called by some scholars, in which 
the Buddha- Doha-0-Gan and many other works 
were written. 

In this literature of the Nath-cult we find 

asceticism of a high order based on an observance 

of moral virtues. An un- 

The )iigh moral tone, impeachable sexual integrity 

is aimed at, and preserved among many 
temptations by the lieroes of these poems, and 
chief amongst them Goraksha Nath, the prince 
of the Yogis, rises to our view surrounded by 
many mystic and legendary tales, resplendent in 
his vows, like the peak of a mountain, wheii 
sunrise is just dispelling the mist around it. H^ 
sets at naught all the temptations that a man 
ever faced from a woman, and saves Mina Nath 
from the moral pitfall to which the latter had 
unheedingly fallen. 

In the songs of Maynamati also we 
find Prince Gopichandra facing temptations 
and becoming glorious by overcoming 
them. Hira, the wealthy harlot, to whose 
fascinations a hundred youths of noble lineage 



THE MORAL VIRTUES 5 

had succumbed^ proved powerless before our 
hero. In the Dharma-literature Prince Lou 
Sen conquers passions like a Yogi. "Women 
renowned for their beauty and accomplishments 
try him, but he proves invincible. Not only 
unimpeachable in sexual morality, the principal 
characters are endowed with virtues of truthful- 
ness and integrity which hold to light some of 
the great features of Buddhistic moral tenets; 
Where could we find a greater martyr at the altar 
of truth and loyalty than Kalu-Dom, the general 
of Lou Sen ? Harihara Baity's struggle for 
overeomingthe temptations of worldly prosperities 
on the one hand, and fears of grim persecu- 
tion on the other, resulting in his ultimate 
triumph, invests him with a solemn grandeur 
which commands our admiration. The Dharma-- 
mangal songs and those of Maynamati 
have . certainly a crude humour and are 
spotted with the blemishes of style of 
illiterate people. But the great idea is there- 
the idea of Unstinted morality, of loyalty and 
devotion to the king, which sets all dangers at 
naught ; of adherence to truth, knowing the 
result to be confiscation of property and death.J 
The characters are often no doubt drawn by- 
clownish hands ; there is a forest of wild legends, 
which almost stifle the breath of the readers 
with their incredibleness and prolixity ; the- 
lerudeness of descriptions and their monotony are 
often tiresome to the extreme. But thesei^ 



6 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGlil 

do not diminish at all the lustre of faith that 
illuminates the pages, — faith in the great moral 
virtues which truly ennoble a race. 

But at this very time when stern asceti- 
cism and strength of character were being 
glorified, we find another 

Reaction. , -, o it >■ i • i>i- 

Side of the picture m which 
the forces of reaction are clearly indicated. 
Vaisnavism of old school and Tantricism 
are shown on the reverse of the picture. We 
find the people of rustic villages, amongst whom 
the practice of Yoga and Tantric culture had 
been current in those days, revolting against all 
rigour of asceticism and yielding to profligacy 
and sexual pleasures. We find the courts of 
kings steeped in these vices, and favouring 
libertinism in the name of religion by a quite 
royal indulgence in sensuous pleasures. We find 
tantrios, originally imbued with -the object of 
attaining a high spiritual goal, sinking low in 
debauchery. Men and women sat freely around 
the Ohakra or the circle where all moral laws 
were set at naught. King Ballala Sen (1100- 
1169 A. D.) had a mistress of the Chandal- 
caste named Pad mini whom he openly raised 
above the status of his chief queen, and obliged 
many of his noblemen to eat the food served 
by her. " ^WRreira^T^^ " is a line which we 
frequently come across in our genealogical 
records, accounting for the loss of social status of 
particular members of our community, and the 



^HE REACTION t 

title ^WQ^ is a contemptuous epithet by which 
our social leaders branded those who obtained 
rewards from the king, for taking food prepared 
by Padmini. It is said that this woman was very 
handsome and was brought by the king to 
his palace for helping him in tantric practices. 
The inscriptions openly praise Lakshman 
Sen for intriguing with the beautiful Kalinga 
women.^ Abhiram Goswami bcrn in 1095 A.D., 
a devout Vaisnava, kept a mistress named 
Malini and this woman is publicly applauded 
in the Vaisnava traditions.* Jayadev himself 
counts it a point of glory to mention the name 
of Padmavati in his songs. She was a " seva- 
dasi " of Jagannath temple, and Shekha 
Subhodaya says that she used to dance in the 
court of LaTfshman Sen, and several authorities 
confirm that she had been at first dedicated to 
the Puri temple from where Jayadev picked her 
up,^ Jayadev glories in calling himself "*W^- 
F?*i-5t^«t ]5aR^ " implying that she danced, while 
he used to play upon some musical instrument 
to keep time. The poets of this period sang 
panegyrics of their patrons the kings, for their 
licentiousness ; and the copper-plate inscriptions 



■ •'jTO5Rroftsrer^^»TKtifti;^%5=T5=infe:" i.a.s.b., Deo. 1909, 
p. 473. 

= See Abhiram Tattwa, Abhiram Fatal and Abiramlilamrita (pub- 
lished by Bhnpatioharan Goswami and Atnlchandra Goswami). 

» See Bhaktamala by Chandra Datta and Joydeva Charitra by 
Banamali Das. ;i;yg , , 



% chaitaNya and his age 

also unmistakably indicate the tendencies of the 
age by describing the situations of Siva and 
Parvati inclose embrace, in a language not quite 
becoming or decent according to modern taste.^ 
On the door-ways of the Pari and Kaniaraka 
temples are found many human figures in 
bas-relief, which are grossly vulgar. In the 
gtound-floor of the Sahitya Parisat buildings, 
an image of Siva embracing Parvati is preserved 
in the gallery of statues ; this image of Siva 
is shockingly vulgar and evidently belongs to 
the age of which we have been speaking. The 
lays of Jayadev which sometimes rise to great 
spiritual heights are indecent in many places 
and the same should be said of the Pavana-duta 
by the poet Dhoi of Lakshnian Sen's court. This 
country is prone to indulge in religious specula' 
tions and there is no lack of subtle interpretations 
attempting to glorify what a moralist would 
justly condemn. But when for three centuries 
beginning from the 12th, we find our art, archi- 
tecture and poetry all dominated by the same 
spirit of indecendy, we must admit that 
during the decline of Hindu power, the standard 
of morality had become low amongst our people, 
due, as I have already said, to a spirit of 
reaction against the stern attitude of the Buddhist 
and Nath ascetics towards materialistic life. 
This indecency and predilection for sensuous 

» See I.A.S.B., Dfec. 1909., p. 471, and Epigraphia Indica, Vol. I, 
p. 307. 



THE REACTION _ 9 

life are manifest in popular literatures . of the 
Krishna and Siva cults. In the Siva songs we 
have vulgar tales of the Great God's gallantry, 
amongst the low class women of the Kuchni and 
Dome castes. The evil-eyed jealousy of Parvati 
described by Rameswar and other poets lias 
undoubtedly some very gross .humour in it. 
In one of the poems we find her complaining 
that though, she had tried to keep. Siva at home , 
at night by tying the edge of her *aH to his 
tigerskin> it proved of no avail, as the Great God 
ran away to meet the Kuchni-women as soon 
as she fell asleep. To the songs of Mahasa 
De-vi these Siva songs are found prefixed as 
prologues, and in the Krishna Kirtan of Ohandi 
Das.we find the same vulgar taste, which has 
given rise to an animated discussion amongst 
scholars, some of whom, familiar with the highly; 
refined and platonic songs of the great poet, hai^e 
expressed a doubt as to the genuineness of the 
book. In Eangpore, Cooch-lbehar, and indeed 
in many parts of North Bengal, Krishna dhama- 
lies are still sung in which Krishna as a rustic? 
cow-herd in (jlownish humour pursues Radha 
for, an embrace or a kiss, and greater the 
vulgarity in these songs, the greater is the 
fun -enjoyed by the farmers and the artizans of 
the.oountry-side. However greatly these songs 
may have been tuodernised in their language, 
their origin should no doubt be traced to 
the ithirteenth and fourteenth centuries and 
8 



10 CHAITANYA AND HIS. AGE 

our readers will find that Chandi Das, being a 
poet of that age, was at first an exponient 
of the popular poetical sentiments,, which, 
intense in their enjoyment of sensual life, 
were also vulgar to the extreme. It was the 
prevalent fashion in that age to be addicted to 
a woman other than one's own wife for tantric 
practices. And amongst the Buddhist of the 
latter-day Mahayana school and among their 
bhikshus and bhikshunis, the Sahaja Dharma 
beijame associated with illicit love. In the 
Buddha-Gan-0-Doha we have many passages 
in which this sexual love is used as symbolic 
of the Sahajia concept of bliss. Chandi Das 
says that at his time Sahajia love was a 
mania with young men, and that many noble- 
minded youths started their career of love 
with the avowed object of reaching a spiritual 
goal; this, however, often proved inaccessible 
to them, and in their attempts to scale the 
height, they fell down to the lowest pit 
of vices, rolling in the mire of sensuous 
pleasures. The poet says that it is a dangerous 
game for young men to play, as one in a million, 
and not two, may conquer flesh and find the true 
spiritual heaven in woman's love. The tantncs 
not only became steeped in sexual vices but 
were dreaded for inhuman cruelties committed 
in the name of religion. We have it in the 
Narott3,n]a Bilasha that a sect of vicious tantrics 
offered human sacrifices to Kali and danced with 



nPANTHEiSM i{ 

swords in hands before her image in horrid 
ecstasy and no passer-by was safe, if unfortu- 
nately he happened to walk by the side of the 
temple at the time. " Even Brahmins are then 
seized and sacrificed before the goddess."^ In 
the Chaitanya Bhagavat we have an elaborate 
description of the robbers who worshipped Kali on 
the eve of an expedition for plundering the house 
of an innocent citizen named Hiranya Pundit. 

The Hindu Renaissance had just commenced 
among the lay people of this province, but they 
were still a prey to those vices which tantricism 
and vitiated Buddhism had brought on during 
the decline of spiritual forces that had originally 
inspired those noble creeds and their rituals. 
We find drunkards, who spurned all rules of 
Hinduism, ate beef and ham, though they were 
Brahmins.^ We find widows of higher classes 
eating meat and fish and people spending 
enormous sums in making clay idols for worship.^ 
They sang songs of Siva or Manasa Devi, and 
of Pal kings for whole nights. These songs, 
however, generally speaking, related to pastoral 
life with all its crude love-makings ; and faith in 
gpds they worshipped was but half -expressed 
in the imperfect popular dialect not yet fully 
developed for literary composition. "Eeligion" 
laments Brindaban Das, "was reduced to a 

' Narattom Bilash, Canto VII. 

' Chaitaoya Bhagavata, Madhya, Chap. - XIII ' and Jayananda's 
Chaitanya Mangal. ' -''''" 



iz CHAIT^Ai^tA AND HIS AGE 

mere form and there was no faith in men.'*^ 
Many, people worshipped Jaksha, the lord of 
wealth, with offerings of wine and meat. 

Pantheism, generally speaking, was the 
reli^jion of the learned during 
•am^nl'frctoJ:!"' this period. When Chaitanya's 
followers sang aloud the name of 
God many people of Nadia condemned it sayiig 
" Who is the god for whom all these frenzied 
uproar is meant ? Man is his own saviour and his 
own god. Where could be any God outside this 
hximan frame ?"^ Chaitanya travelled through 
the whole of Southern India and met Dhundi- 
ram Tirtha of Tungabhadra, Mathura-nath of 
Tripadi, Bhargadev of Tripatra, Bharati Gossain 
of Chandipore, and many leaders of Sannyasis, 
who were staunch supporters of pantheism. 
Vasudeva Sarbabhouma, a great Sanskrit scholar 
of Bengal, was himself one such. He did not 
believe in a personal god and never took tiie 
mahaprasad of Puri temple before his conver- 
sion to Vaisnavism later on. 

Chaitanya- chandrodaya Natak gives us a 

faithful account of the sort of religious life 

that was around. It speaks 

Ealse Sannyasis. <« o • i . •. 

01 bannayasis who remained 
With closed eyeis as if lost in deep meditation, 
but when they heard the jingling sound of 



Chaitanya Bhagabat, Adi. 
CHaitanya Bhagabat, Adi, Chap. II. 



BENGAL IN kEED OF A SaViOUR is 

bracelets, indicating the approach of women, 
they slowly opened their eyes and looked with 
lust; of pantheists who believed in no other 
gods than their own selves ; of Kapalikas, both 
Buddhists and Sivaits, who were false Tantrics, 
of men who were given to visiting shrines for 
mere curiosity without any spiritual object; 
and of Sannyasis whose pride was as great as 
their haughtiness of temper. 

Thus we see that the grandeur of moral 
virtues upon which Buddhism had been founded 
was wellnigh reduced to atoms. Nagarjuna's 
school, greatly depraved and confused with crude 
superstitious beliefs expounded the worship of 
tortoise and owl {ulluha) with curious specula- 
tive theories about the origin of the Universe. 
Their temples held rustic festivities and though 
a glimmer of faith was occasionally seen in them, 
the Mahayana had spent its best energies and 
could no longer elevate the people. I'he tan- 
trics vainly strove with the help of human 
corpses, wine and women to attain a religious 
. goal ; and the pantheists in their self-sufficiency 
and pride of scholarship were far off from that 
humility and spiritual meekness 
The impetus re- ^^hich mav alonc lead to the 

. ceived from Islam. ■' 

growth of true faith. The 
Islam, moreover, with its great energy and appeal 
to personal God knocked, about this time, at 
the gate of Bengal declaring that One Great God 
was the supporter of the virtuous as He was the 



14 CHAITANYA AND HIS AG^ 

supporter of the world. Their vehement faith 
was irresistible and led the Hindu miiid 
involuntarily to the old Aryan faith in a personal 
God as the many speculative and philosophical 
theories on religion current in the country could 
no longer satisfy their growing spiritual neisd. 
Our province specially was in need of a saviour, 
of one who would prove that the true well of 
spiritual bliss sprang from faith and not from 
intellectual subtleties, and that moral law and 
a sense of brotherhood were the concomitant 
forces of love which could alone bring the 
Incomprehensible One within human realisation. 



Chandi Das. 

At this juncture, when the cries of the 
Mahayana Buddhism for the cause of mofal 
virtues were becoming less and less audible with 
the gradual disappearance of that faith from the 
Gangetic valley — when Tantricism was losing 
sfci^gth as a religious force and leading men to 
revel in debaucheries — when the temple and the 
court, poetry and art delighted in sensuousness, — 
there appeared on our religious and literary 
horizon a great poet who representing the glow 
and ardour of impassioned love — the significant 
feature of the past school — became the harbinger 
of a new age which soon after dawned on our 
moral and spiritual life and charged it with 
the white heat of its emotional bliss. 



CHANDI DAS 15 

We cannot give any accurate date as regards 
any incident of Chandi Das's life. There is 
of course an enigmatic verse which has been 
construed into implying that in the year 1403 A.D. 
Chandi Das had composed 996 songs. But the 
mysterious writing will not, I am afraid, stand 
the test of historical scrutiny and we cannot use 
it as evidence of any value. . • 

There are some anonymous verses in which 
it is stated that Chandi Das and 

Interview between it-i x- l xii i «• 

Vidyapati and Chandi- V idyapatl mOt OU the baUKS Of 

the Ganges, that during the 
interview one E-upanarayan — Raja of Mithila — 
or whoever he might have been, was present, and 
that the poets enjoyed each other's company and 
discussed their favourite topic of love from many 
different points of view. These anonymous 
songs are undated, and are to be found in the 
Padakalpataru compiled in the middle of the 
18th century. Babu Nagendranath Gupta,* the 
learned > editor of Vidyapati's poems, does not 
attach any historical value to this tradition, though 
h^ does not support his views by any reason. But 
we cannot summarily reject a tradition to which 
some of our early writers have subscribed ; the 
details of conversation between the two poets as 
given by these writers may be called in question, 
but the interview itself may be accepted as a 
historical incident. 

But all the same, we do not possess any definite 
evidence as regards the time when Chandi Das 



16 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

lived. We may, however, make an approximate 
guess from certain facts. Narahari Sarkar, one 
of the most intimate friends of Chaitanya and born 
not later than 1465 A.D., sings an eulogistic song 
about the poet in which he says that Chandi Da&'s 
poems had literally flooded the country at his tiihe, 
that Chandi Das was as remarkable . a musician, 
as he was a poet, and that he was a learned 
scholar whose songs were inspired by love for 
R?imi^-the washerwoman. It is well-known to 
all that Chaitanya chanted the songs of Chandi, 
Das night and day. None of the historical works 
written about Chaitanya or his followers gives 
any firsthand information about the incidents' of 
Chandi Das's life though many lyrical songs of 
the 15th century and of later periods are prolific 
in their praise of the poet. Ishan Nagar, who 
wrote a biography of Ad waita in 1560 A.D., refers 
to an interview which the latter had with Vidyapati 
probably in the year 1454. Had Chandi Das 
been alive about this time, there is no doubt 
that some of the Vaishnab apostles at least, all 
of whom were great admirers of Chandi Das,' 
would have visited the great Bengali poet who 

lived at Nanoor in the Birbhum 
cSTs-trr'"' District. But we are not awaTe 

of any record relating to such 
an incident. So the natural surmise is that 
Chandi Das must have died at a period earlier' 
than the middle of the 15th century. How far 
earlier, that is the question now and let us ' 



CHANDI D/ S 17 

discuss it here. We find that one Deva Sarma, a 
Brahmin clefk, copied the Kavyaprakas in Novem- 
ber 1398 by order of Vidyapati. In one of the 
songs of this poet we find mention of Gyasuddin 
who died in 1373 A.D. So Vidyapati no doubt 
had already made his mark as a poet before 
1373. If we accept the statement of the 
anonymous writers about his interview with 
Chandi Das to be true, that event probably took 
place when the latter was already in the prime 
of his youth and Vidyapati had just begun to be 
known to fame. I cannot altogether reject, 
as I have already stated, a tradition which has 
long prevailed in the country, unless it is upset 
by proper historical evidence. 

At this stage of our investigation Mr. Basanta- 
ranjan Ray brought the Krishnakirtan to the 
notice of scholars. Expert calligraphic opinion 
asserts that the handwriting of the copy could 
not be of a date later than the end of the 
14th century. This work of Chandi Das must 
have attained a certain celebrity before others 
could think of copying it out. Hence we believe 
that Krishnakirtan could not have been written 
later than the middle of the 14th century. The 
Krishnakirtan of Chandi Das belongs to that class 
of love-songs which is called Krishna Dhamali 
and which is current even now in the backwoods 
of North Bengal. The poem describes the amours 
of Radha-Krishna in many different phases. 
The rustic element, however, predominates in 
3 



18 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

.these juvenile writings of Chandi Das. Krishna 
here is a simple village lad who runs after the 
p3,storal queen of his heart — the pursuit, is 
conducted with an intense ardour, amidst the 
gay natural scenery on the banks of the blaek- 
.watered Jamuna, amidst market places an.d 
groves resounding with the songs of birds; no 
condition however low, no situar 

Krishnakirtau. ,. i i j j j.- 

tion however hard, daunting 
the love-stricken rustic lad who. wears the mask 
of a god. This passionate ardour of the flesh 
need not be condemned in the poetry of 
mediaeval school as it supplied inspiration. tQ 
many of the greatest poets of that age. Towards 
the end of Krishnakirtau the poet strikes a higher 
note which becomes loudly audible in his later 
songs. So this work marks the transition of 
Vaishnab poetry from the sensuous to the idealis' 
tic. The earlier songs throb with somewhat 
gross human instincts, the later songs burst into 
melodies of finer idealism, the characteristic of 
the later Vaishnab school. If we read the 
account given by the poet himself as to how he 
fell in love with Eami, the problem how this 
transition came over the spirit of his songs will 
be solved. But we shall come to it later on. 

The Krishna-dhamali to which we have 
already referred was once the craze of whole 
Bengal, but which now survives being driven 
into the borders of Northern Bengal, where the 
old things of Hindu life have not yet altogether 



DllATH OP CHANDI DAS 19 

J)erished. Chandi Das greatly embellished that 
rustic mode of treating Krishna-topics by freely 
indenting treasures of lyrical wealth from Jay- 
dev. Scholars have come forward to brand 
Krishnakirtan as a piece of daring literary 
forgery. But I have met their arguments 
in my previous course of lectures. In my 
mind there is absolutely no shadow of doubt as 
to the genuineness of this work. Now accepting 
the expert opinion about the date of the copy 
of Krishnakirtan I find that the book could not 
have been written by the poet later than 1350. 
I shall show that Chandi Das died a most tragic 
and shocking death that has ever befallen the 
lot of a poet, between 1383 and 1385 A.D. 

The latest discovery about Chandi Das is this 
sad and tragic tale of his death. Some years ago, 
I referred in a note supplied to the editor of 
Krishnakirtan to a tradition extant in the neigh- 
bourhood of Nanoor, the native village of Chandi 
Das, that the Begum of a Nawab had fallen 
in love with the poet, and that the result of 
this ill-fated passion was the punishment of 
a cruel dekth. inflicted on him. The Sahitya--: 
parisat library of old Bengali Mss. has lately 
come in possession of a few pages, the hand- 
writing of which is referred to a date about 
250 years back, substantially confirming the 
tradition mentioned by me several years ago. 
Alas! the tale is a harrowing one. It was 
the Emperor of Gour and not a Nawab of the 



20 , CHATTA^NtA AI>fD HIS AGE 

locality, as I said in my note, who punished 
Ohandi Das with death. He had invited the 
poet to his' court having heard of his great 
fame as a musician and poet. Rami, the washer- 
woman, is herself the writer of this historical 
iaccount. She laments the day when Chandi Das 
visited the court of the Moslem Emperor. His 
queen heard Chandi Das sing some of his master- 
pieces. They were so sweet that the very trees 
and the sky seemed to be rapt in silent admira- 
tion. The queen was beside 
chaDdK ^^^^^ °* herself with joy and felt a 
passion for the poet. How 
this passion developed and the matter attracted 
the notice of the autocrat is not knowft. 
Rami skips over details ; but she says that 
the queen when asked, made a bold front 
and confessed all to her royal husband. The 
EmperoY ordered that Chandi Das should be 
tied to the back of an elephant and led from 
place to place and scourged in such a manner 
that his flesh, sinews and nerves must bfe 
torn till he bled to death. The queen inter- 
ceded and said, "You do not know ' the . ster- 
ling merit of the man. In the whole world 
there does not breathe aiiother soul as warm as 
his." For mercy she pleaded, but in vain. 
The infuriated monarch was the more enragM. 
Rami writes that she saw him glance at her 
from the baick of the elephant with tender love^ 
fts the last mbmentdrew near. His clothes day all 



tniTDER ELEPHANT'S Fl^ET i\ 

drenched in blood and looking at her steadily 
all the time as the elephant moved on, the great 
poet of Bengal closed his eyes without uttering 
a moan. 

The elephant was often made an instrument 
in those days for punishing offenders of high rank, 
Perdausi was ordered to be placed under the feet 
of an elephant and trampled down to death, but 
the poet succeeded in effecting an interview with 
Sultan Muhammad and averting the punish^ 
ment. We find Jehangir contriving to set an 
elephant against Sher Afgan, the husband of 
Meherunnisa, though that Chief ' could hold his 
own by his superior tact and unmatched physical 
strength. The animal after a ferocious attack 
took to heels and fled, terror-struck by the blow 
inflicted on it by the Chief. The Mul^ammadan 
history of Western Asia is replete with instances 
of punishment of death inflicted on men of rank 
by placing them under the feet of elephants. 

Thus died Chandi Das by the capricious orders 
of the Gour Emperor. He could not have been 
possibly more than forty years of age at the 
time of his death. Por in the East a woman 
seldom falls in love with a man above that age. 
The sad tale of this tragic affair has not been 
all told. The Begum's end was as tragic, if not 
more glorious. Repentance was natural to her 
in the matter, for she felt that if she had not 
made the confession, the king's anger would not 
h^ve possibly reached such a climactic point.' 



aa CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

There is nothing in the account to show that 
the queen had been guilty of anything dis- 
honourable. It was her great admiration for 
the poet which led to a romantic feeling of 
lo7e, and there is a hint in the account that 
the poet reciprocated her sentiments. Over- 
whelmed with repentance for . her confession 
which she had made relying on a generous spirit 
of appreciation and indulgent pardon from her 
husband, but which led to the unfortunate catas^ 
trophe, she was shocked at the Emperor's atti- 
tude, and when the cruel scene was enacted 
before her eyes, she fainted away unable to bear 
the sight. She never recovered from that swoon, 
for the beating of her heart had stopped as she 
saw the horrible torture and death of her lover. 

Rami says that as the queen lay dead she 
hurried to clasp her feet with tearful eyes. Here 
ends her verses. 

Who this Emperor of Gour was, cannot be 
definitely ascertained, but if we take into ac- 
count the fact that Chandi Das wrote his juvenile 
work — the Krishnakirtan — about 1350 and that 
he could not have been, as already mentioned, 
more than 40 years old at the time of his death, 
we are led to suppose that it was the EinperoE 
Shamsuddin it who probably passed this horrible 
sentence upon one of the most glorious of 
Bengal's sons. From 1342 to 1385 five monarchs 
ruled Bengal. Shamsuddin Bhengara from 1342 
to 1368, who was " much respected and beloved bj? 



SAMSUDDIN II 23 

..his.people"; Sultan Gayasuddin (1359 to 1373) 
was a patron of poetry who had sent an invita- 
tion to Haflz to come to Bengal and settle as 
his court-poet and about whom Vidyapati wrote 
an eulogistic verse. The next Emperor Assulat- 
win ruled for ten years peacefully and was a very 
popular monarch. About the next Emperor 
Shamsuddin II, Stewart says, " on the death of 
Sultan Assulatwin, the nobles raised to the 
throne his adopted son, a youth of very inferior 
talent, who took the title of Shamsuddin II. 
.For little more than two years he enjoyed a 
'tranquil reign, but at the expiration of that 
-period, Kanis, the Zenaindar of Vetoria, rebelled 
against him, and the youth being unsupported 
by the Muhammadan Chiefs was defeated and 
lost, his life in the year 1385 A.D." He was 
,80 unpopular that even the Muhammadan Chiefs 
did not support him though a Hindu Zemindar 
-killed him and secured the throne for himself. 
May we not imagine that the cruel punishment 
.of death on the greatest poet of Bengal was 
probably one of the reasons which had made his 
rule very unpopular in the country ? 

We can expect no historical clue to this 
matter from the records of the Vaishnabs them- 
selves. They skip oyer anything that is melan- 
choly or tragic. Their conspiracy of silence in 
regard to Chaitanya's passing away is well 
known. Nor had they, while writing elaborate 
memoirs, described when and how Sachi Devi or 



J4 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

Bishnupriya died. So we should not be surprised 
at the fact that none of the Vaishnab historians 
has written anything about the tragic end of 
Chandi Das. In Jayananda's Chaitanya Mangal 
we come across a hurried line stating that 
Gadadhar Pandit had burned himself alive to 
escape from Muhamraadan oppression, but the 
details are not given. It is curious to note that 
many points in the career of Gadadhar Pandit, 
one of Chaitanya's best friends, are to be found 
in all authoritative books of Vaishnabs, save 
this most important point of his horrible death. 
It is true that the Vaishnabs do not at all regard 
Jayananda's Chaitanya Mangal to be a book of 
any worth, because he cared not to follow their 
canons ; he has not only referred to the tragic 
death of Gadadhara but given us historical 
information about how Chaitanya passed away, 
as no other writer has done ; and we instinctively 
feel that his accounts are quite reliable, how- 
ever much he might have disregarded the 
delicate feeling of the Vaishnab community in 
the matter. 

We have already referred to the fact that 
love for Rami brought on a change over the 
spirit of Chandi Das's poetry. It was certainly 
an epoch-making event in his life. He was a 
worshipper of Basuli and was piously afraid 
of any romantic feeling for a woman. But 
the heart runs out of control. The poet's 
gti-ength fails him, 'Look how he falls prostrate 



BASULI'S ORDER 35 

before Basuli and laments himself ! The holi- 
ness of his vow has gone for naught ! Night and 
day he prays, but the glimpses of the glorious 
form of Rami half-revealed through her blue 
Remorse. - ^"^^ '^ the temple-courtyard, 

maddens him inspite of his vow 
of self -dedication to Basuli. His heart is exactly 
in the same state as a flower fallen in the tide that 
flows irresistibly like fate, " Alas ! mother," he 
laments before Basuli, " You could not preserve 
your child from these unworthy feelings for a 
woman of low caste ! My austerities and efforts, 
my secret vows could not save me !'" But not 
long after, Basuli's voice he heard, as if in a 
dream — it said, "Love this woman, my son, 
it is your fate that you should do so — nay, this 
love will sanctify you ; neither I nor hundreds 
of gods and goddesses like me will be able to give 
you a glimpse of that higher life which this 
woman's love will teach you."^ 

Chandi Das arose — wonder-struck. In his 

heart of hearts he had worshipped Rami. Only a 

conventional sense of immorality, a consciousness 

of his difficult social environment had filled his 

mind with remorse and fear. 

He worships Rami. 

Now Basuli's mandate was 
clear. Conventions and fears were set at 
naught. Each time he saw her, he found her 



1 Chandi Ras's edition, published by the Sahitya Parishat of 
Calcutta, Supplement, p. 4. 
4 



•26 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

beautiful and lovely as a flower, holy as a 
goddess, a thing to be placed on the head like 
a gift dropped from the hands of Basuli herself. 
He says, " Though T am a Brahmin and you 
are a washer- woman, you are to me holy as. 
Gayatri."' He rises above caste-prejudices, and 
sees good in love far more than in his Brahminic 
blood or in the scriptures. He declares Rami 
to be as adorable as Parvati, the giver of 
fortunes, as Lakshmi, the giver of luck and as 
Saraswati, the goddess of fine arts and learning. 
Thus he raises his love to the status of legendary 
goddesses, and this no Brahmin had, I suppose, 
done before him. 

So the traditional Brahminic superiority, 
sacredness of scriptures and the unapproachable 
dignity and sanctity of gods all fell to the ground. 
Ghandi Das saw one temple in the whole universe, 
that was the cottage of the washer-woman near 
Basuli's courtyard, and he became the high 
priest there. His love was not limited by any 
conventional idea. He calls Bami his pitri 
■matri — " father and mother." No lover ever 
spoke such a language. Love to him was 
a homogeneous and undivided whole. Among 

rivers one is called the Ganges, 
a Mrtedte"fe."°' '" another Godavari and another 

Jamuna, but when they come 
down and fall into the ocean, they loose their 

' Chandi Das's edition, published by the Sahitya Farishat of 
Calcutta, Supplement, p. 333. 



LOVE'S PHRASEOLOGY NOT LlMlTED ^7 

individual names and are called by one 
common name. So our paternal affection, 
brotherly feelings and nuptial love, even friend- 
ship, in the highest degree of intensity, become 
one and are designated by the same name. No 
poet outside India has signified the stages of 
this one homogeneous idea and classified it 
so beautifully. The dasya, sahhya, batsalya 
and madhuryya of the Vaishnabs indicate 
degree and not quality. The old poet Valmiki 
was the first to put thi? truth in the mouth of 
Dasaratha in his appreciation of Kausalya in 
the following lines : — 

*' g^ ?RfI '^ sftsmr ^^^W ^«l^^^ 1 

But no other poet than Chandi Das has said 
this so forcibly in respect of his lady-love. " Thou 
art to me my parents." This indicates absolute 
dependence and resignation. But look from the 
worldly point of view ! An orthodox Brahmiii 
speaking in that irreverent and sacrilegious 
way not only trampled upon all conventions of 
Hinduism about caste and religion, but also 
gave a rude shock to the fundamental sense of 
social morality. Por no lover in the Hindu 
community or in any other community would 
call his lady-love his parent, that would be 
blasphemous. Was it not meet that for such 
profane speech he was outcasted and proclaimed 



28 CHAITANYA and HIS AGE 

fallen from the Brahminic order by the beat 
of drum? But though his own men treated 
him so, he did not lose his faith in man 
and he saw no god as high as man. He says, 
"Hear me, brother man, Man is the highest, 
none higher than he." He certainly saw 
divinity in the human form before him more 
than elsewhere. He would believe in no ill 
from one whom he loved. Radha in one of his 
songs says to Krishna, " I am not accustomed, 
dear, to see your happiness and mine apart from 
one another, what delights you delights me also." 
So the lover may show all sorts of cruelty, but 
cannot hurt the soul wearing the armour of 
this love, and Chandi Das says again, " One who 
loves and breaks, does not attain the spiritual 
goal."^ A lover is bound to retain his love for the 
person whom he has once loved. However much 
he may suffer, spiritually he will gain by his devo- 
tion. Divorce therefore is not recognised in the 
law-book of Ohandi Das. Did Christ forsake 
his people because some of them had crucified 
him ? It is the flower's love, tear off its petals, 
crush it cruelly, it will have a smile for you still. 
At this stage only a step further and one attains 
love divine. Says Ohandi Das, "One who is 
unseen and beyond all comprehension, will be 
perceived by him alone who has loved."^ 

^ Ohandi Dae's edition, published by the Sahitya Parishat of 
Calcutta supplement p. 337. 
= Ibid, p. 3*3. 



HIS POEMS BREATHE A FREEDOM 29 

And we know that before Chaitanya was born, 
Chandi Das had felt this love, and been lifted to 
the plain from which he had already visions of 
his God. Love human had taught him love 
divine. Otherwise where in the ordinaiy 
romantic poems of love, do we so frequently 
come across lines which charged with spiri- 
tual meaning bring us to the 
to lovl diviue. ^"^ '"^' threshold of the mystic world ? 
Radha fasts " %f% 'Sft^tC?, ^^rl 
^*t^" when love for Krishna has dawned 
on her heart ; she wears the ochre-coloured cloth 
of a yogini and recites the name of Krishna, till 
like a Vaishnab apostle she is beside herself with 
joy. The advent of Chaitanya is presaged in 
the account Chandi Das gives of Radha as pros- 
trating herself at the feet of every one who 
speaks of Krishna. And did not Chaitanya do 
the very .same thing ? He too like Chandi Das's 
Radha fainted at the sight of the dark-blue 
clouds which brought to his memory the' lovely 
colour of Krishna. 

Chandi Das not only frees himself from the 
grip of religious and social conventions, but from 
the bonds of Poetics and in fact from all sorts of 
rules laid down by scholars. He was himself a 
great scholar. Even if we had not his brother 
Nakul's testimony on that point, supported half 
a century later by a statement of Narahari, the 
numerous slokas in Sanskrit that adorii his 
Krishnakirtan and his closely literal and yai 



30 CHAITANYA and His AGE 

felieitous translation of gome of the lays of 
Jaydeb evidence his erudition 
fronraiitlU'lr" ^nd learning. But he rejects all 
Sanskritic high-sounding words 
in his later compositions, though in Krishnakirtan 
they are plentiful. He rejects the rules of Sans- 
krit Poetics that eternally lay down the bee to be 
a lover of the flower. The flower, he says, does 
not go to the bee when the latter does not come. 
The moon cannot be a lover of the lily, as we 
find in the Poetics, for when the lattef dies in 
frost, the moon smiles from heaven. Thus freer 
ing himself entirely from all religious, social, 
and literary thraldom, Ohandi Das brings in a 
new era in Vaishnab poetry and in Vaishnab 
religion, which in the next period trampled down 
all conventions and orthodoxy. 

The sensuous element becomes gradually 
idealised in Chandi Das's later writings. His 
Krishnakirtan shows him at first as one with the 
poets of an earlier epoch, a faithful disciple of 
Joydev, scholarly and gorgeous in his descripfeito 
of the objects of senses. A-t this stage he is not 
A^ithout spiritual meaning in occasional verses, 
and is an exponent of the popular sentiment, 
the echo of which is still found in the Krishna 
Dhamalis. His language is aglow with 
impassioned rural poetry that draws no line of 
demarcation between decency and indecency. 
But s-uddenly by the grace of Basuli and love 
for Rami we find him at a later stage tlirowing 



BHAGAVATA AND OTHER SACRED BOOKS 31 

off the mantle of sensuousness as the tree puts 
off its bark, and displaying the blossom of 
spiritual love and fehcitous emotions which 
reached their flowering point in the trances of 
the great apostles of Vaishnavism. 

The influence of the Bhagavata, and other 
Sacred Works. 

A. century before Chaitanya was born, the 
Bhagavata and the Gita had begun to be widely 
read in this province, as also in other parts 
of India. We find Govinda Das, Chaitanya's 
companion, during his tour in Southern India 
in 1510-11 A.D. recording that at Poona 
there was a regular craze for 

GiL^nd^/Bhiavat': ^^^ ^^udy of the Gita and the 
Bhagavata.^ When Chaitanya 
was there, an illiterate Brahmin was found study- 
ing the Gita with a zeal which was laughed at 
by the scholars. For that diligent student of the 
sacred book neither understood nor correctly 
recited the slokas with which he kept himself 
engaged day and night.^ The lays of Jaydev and 

'oKta ifa^ ^f^ Tfw »r#^ II 

^t^^ if^^ ^ C¥? iltft TtOT II p. 134. 
' Govinda Das's Karcha, p. IGO. 



3-2 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

Chandi Das, based on the Bhagavata, were sung 
throughout this province, and we know it on the 
authority of Narahari that these songs, at his 
timci filled the whole world^ ; — this world was 
no doubt Bengal and Orissa. The Chaitanya- 
bhagavata (1573 A.D.) says that the Gita and the 
Bhagavata were widely read in the country 
before Chaitanya, though the author regrets 
that right interpretation of the sacred books was 
missed by the scholarly pandits in their enthu- 
siasm to display erudition. Our Dharmamangal 
poems, which give us glimpses of the Hindu 
courts before the advent of Islam record that 
the Bhagavata was studied there regularly, 
and that the kings at their leisure-hours listen- 
ed to discourses on that scripture from their 
court -pandits. The 10th Skanda of the Bhaga- 
vata, however, formed the subject of special study 
of the Bengalis. The 11th Skanda treats matters 
in a philosophical spirit. Bengal being a pastoral 
country, its inhabitants delighted in pastoral 

poetry and pastoral religion 
JB^Sbaf '^"'^ "' «^«re than in anything else, and 

the 10th Skanda embodies 
these in a way which has perhaps no parallel in 
world's literature. 

The sports of Krishna as a boy are described 
in the tenth Skanda in such a fascinating manner 
that it has a special appeal for an emotional race 

' Chandi Das published by Sahitya Pariaat, Supplement "■^," 



THE SPORTS 33 

like the Bengalis. These sports on the sunny 
banks of the dark-watered Jamuna are richly 
detailed in the- canto. The boys sometimes 
run pursuing the shadows of birds that fly 
in the sky. They mimic the apes by showing 
their series of small teeth, — they catch; the mon- 
keys by their tails and often jump from bough 
to bough pursuing them. They cover their 
bodies with striped blankets and crawl on hands 
and knees and become bulls and cows themselves 
amongst their owa bulls and cows. Sometimes 
one of them shuts his eyes and becomes blind and 
tries to find out his way in that condition. One 
dances in imitation of peacocks, 
The sports of the ^jjjj another iumps over a small 

boys, •• J- 

stream imitating the frgg. One 
takes fancy for becoming a crane and cover- 
ing himself with a white cloth sits amongst 
cranes ; while another shrinks and trembles in 
fear as if he has seen a tiger, where there is 
nothing of the kind. One hums with the bees, 
whilst his comrade imitates the sounds of a 
cuckoo or walks with the geese moving tp and fro 
as those birds do.* Krishna and Balaram, when 
five or six years old, do all these merry-makings 
with other gay boys of the Vrinda groves. The 
brothers sometimes pull a small cow by the tail 
and, when the latter runs forward, it carries the 
struggling boys behind ita heels to the amuse- 

i See Bhagavata, Skanda X, Chap. XII, Verses 6-12 Chap. XVIII, 
Verses 9-16. 

5 



84 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

ment of the elderly people who witness these 
sports. 

That Krishna is God incarnate is of course 
in evidence everywhere. While playing a hun- 
dred games in this way, he now and then unfolds 
his divinity to his bewildered comrades by 
suddenly killing great giants like fiakasura, 
Triuabarta and Aghasura, and crushing under 
his feet the mighty crest of the snake 
Kaliya. There is a genial breath of affection and 
emotional tenderness in the whole environment 
and specially in the house, for fond Jasoda 
dotes on young Krishna and promising ever- 
more in her mind not to beat him for the mischief 
he does almost every hour, she sometimes 
loses her temper very justly. For what mother 
could bear to see that during her short absence, 
the child had broken her milk-pitcher, her vessels 
full of curd and butter, and after having eaten a 
small part of the contents himself, the marks of 
which were on his mouth and teeth, was detected 
in distributing the remainder amongst a host of 
monkeys that had gathered round him, — ^he 
looking like the very prince of them ! Jasoda 
was a milk-maid and these pitchers and vessels 
were articles of her trade. Now she pursues the 
mischief-making imp, who with many sprightly 
leaps evades his mother and at last, caught 
by her, submits to the punishment of being bound 
with ropes ; but these fall short by a few inches, 
each time she adds to them by bringing in fresh 



THE TEKTH SKANDA 35 

ropes, so that she cannot tie them in a knot. 
The surprised mother looks with wonder and 
fear. Is it a child or what ? At this stage she 
sees in the child a manifestation of divinity and 
is filled with confusion. When the mother is thus 
confused and frightened, the child-god withdraws 
the manifestation of his divinity, and once more 
appears as a little thing extremely playful arid 
lovable, whom the mother kisses and calls her 
own. Sometimes the rainy season, the dark night 
and the lonely forest-paths are made a back- 
ground from which his plays and love-makings 
are shown with a singular effect. The whole 
pastoral country responds as it were to the call 
of his flute from this background, the irresistible 
music of which makes the women of the Gokul 
come out of their homes and surrender 
themselves unto His love. 

The pastoral plays and a thousand attractive 
incidents of pastoral life have a special charm 
for the Bengalis, and if one examines a library 
of old Bengali manuscripts, one will certainly be 
surprised to see what a large number of 
these contain the Bengali versions of the 10th 
Skanda of the Bhagavata. The whole country 
became literally flooded over by these versions, 
and, as I have already stated, this liking for the 
Bhagavata-lore had commenced long before 
Chaitanya came to the world. In the Krishna- 
kirtan of Chandi Das there are many passages 
which read like free versions of the 10th Skanda 



S6 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

of the Bhagavata. This Skanda was translated 
later on by Maladhar Basu in 1480 A.D. or 6 
years before the birth of Ohaitanya. 

The biographies of Chaitanya show that in 
his childhood he played with his comrades all the 
plays that Krishna had played according to the 
Bhagavata. These sports of Krishna had indeed 
become the craze with the children of Bengal at 
that time ; some one of Ghaitanya's comrades 
became Baka or Aghasur^ and fought with 
another who played the part of Krishna. In 
these Chaitanya was generally the leader. In the 
■Chaitanya Bhagavata we find Nityananda as a 
child playing Krishna-plays with his playfellows 
at Ekchaka. The breaking of the cart and the 
killing of Kansa were of course the familiar sub- 
jects ; he sometimes wore false whiskers and beard 
and played the part of Narada. The juvenile 
poems of Ohandi Das illustrate h6w platforms 
were raised, where players robed themselves in 
pastoral dresses and played the parts of Krishna 
and his little companions. Sometimes they played 
all the ? parts of the various incarnations of 
f Vishnu,* and Chaitanya himself in his childhood 
followed the foot-pri!nts of birds, or covered 
himself with a striped cloth to appear as a bull 
after Krishna.* 

Ramananda born in 1299 A.D. (according to 
Sir R. G. Bhiandarkar) and fifth in apostolic 

'. Chandi Das, published by the Sahitya i*ariBat, pp. 14-20. 
■ ' ■ Chaitanya Bhagavata, Atul GoswAmi's edition, Adi, p. 40. 



A BRAHMIN PLAYER DIES 3^ 

succession from Ramanuja worshipped both 
Krishna and Rama and made no distinction 
between them as they were both held to be incar- 
nations of Vishnu. In Bengal too we find Murari 
Gupta and others following the footprints of that 
great Vaishnab apostle of Southern India and 
showing devotion to Rama and Krishna alike.' 
Murari composed many beautiful hymns in San- 
skrit in praise of Rama, and Chaitanya was so 
delighted to hear these that he gave Murari the 

title of Ramadas.^ The episodes 
course of pia^y"^ '" of Rama's life were acted by 

Bengali children along with 
those of Krishna ; and Nityananda had played 
them all long before he first met Chaijianya in 
1508.^ The emotion which inspired the players was 
great, and rose to a frenzy of excitement which 
sometimes produced tragic results. It is said in 
the Chaitanya Bhagavata that a Brahmin playr 
ing the part of Dasarath was so greatly over- 
powered by grief at Rama's exile that he died 
in course of the play on the platform.* 

(iv) Vaishnavism in Bengal before Chaitanya. 

Vaishnavism was already firmly planted in 
Bengal by the endeavours of Sen kings who 
had come from Southern India. For we find 

' Chaitanya Charitamrita, Bangabasi edition, p. 169. 
^ Chaitanya Bhagavata, Atnl Goewami's edition, p. 65. 
^ ' i6!d,p. 66. . ' , ■ 



38 CltAn?ANYA AND itlS AGE 

stone - images of the god, popularly ca lied Vashudev , 
from every part of this country, traced from the 
time of these sovereigns. Some of the Pal kings 
of the later times also became devoted worship- 
pers of this deity. With a slight change in the 
form of this god he takes a different name. He 
has four arras, holding the shell, the disc, the 
mace and the lotus. If by the first arm he holds 
the mace he is called Vashudev ; but if by that 
arm he holds the disc he is called Pradyumna. 
In this way he takes the diffe- 
ofvathudev'"* "'"""' ^^nt names of Sankarsana, 
Aniruddha, Keshava, Narayana, 
Madhava, Govinda, Vishnu, Madhusudana, Tri- 
bikrama, Vamana, Sridhara, Hrishikesha, Padma- 
nava, Daraodara, Purushottama, Achyuta, Krish- 
na, Hari, Adhaksaja, TJpendra, and Janardana, 
simply by changing the sacred emblems of 
divinity from one hand to another. The 
iconography of' this god popularly known as 
Vashudev is minutely given in the Chaitanya 
Charitamrita. For the sake of convenience, how- 
ever, we will follow the popular name Vashu- 
dev in designating this god. As all these 
different names imply the same deity, it is of no 
use to enter into intricacies of names which 
concern those worshippers only who have to per- 
form different rituals in regard 
BeI^^"deTtyf "°* *" *« *^e different names. This 
deity Vashudev, however, was 
originally no god of Bengal, for there is no 



THE IMAGES OF BLACK STONE 89 

tradition of the god to be found in the works of our 
earlier potters and sculptors who made images of 
our gods. In the old sculpture of Bengal we find 
Krishna with his flute, but nowhere is this deity 
in evidence to prove that Vashudev had been 
worshipped here before the Sen kings became 
dictators of the religion under the Brahmanic 
renaissance. 

But nevertheless the figure of this deity 
caught the imagination of the Bengalis in later 
times, for in almost every village of importance 
throughout this province we find images of 
Vashudev recovered from tanks and under- 
ground. He was certainly imported into Bengal 
by the Sen kings from Southern India. We find 
these Vashudevs disfigured by the hands of 
iconoclasts lying in largest numbers in Eastern 
Bengal, specially Bikrampore, the reputed seat 
of the Sen kings. , 

These images were generally made of black 
stone. They often show a remarkable tenderness 
and grace in execution inspite of being wrought 
out in hard stone. The lips, the nose and the 
cheeks are so soft that they seem to be made 
of clay or wax rather than hard blstck stone. 
The dark blue tint of this stone lends a Ibvely 
interest to the images, so that when they were 
mutilated, destroyed and removed from the 
tehaples, the helpless worshippers associated the 
colour with divinity. They began to be fasci- 
nated by the sight of the dark ranges of clouds, 



40 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

of the dark Jamuna and of everything that had 
a dark bluish colour. In the songs and poems 
of the Bengrali Vaishnabs we often meet 
with panegyrics of the dark colour which is 
Krishna's, but though Krishna's dusty colour is 
well-known, nowhere outside 

The dark-blae colour. ^^^ province is SO mUCh StrOSS 

laid upon the beauty of the dark colour in 
popular songs. The people had shed their 
blood in their attempts to save the temples 
from the hands of the ruthless destroyers, and 
when they failed they could not look upon 
anything dark without being reminded of their 
god. Hence long before Chaitanya this colour had 
become the craze with the Vaishnabs. Chandi Pas 
makes his Radha thr6w away the floral wreath 
that adorned her dark braids, so that she might 
revel in an undisturbed sight of the dark colour 
of her luxuriant hair. She gazed with wild 
emotion of joy at the dark-blue neck of the 
peacock, and wlien she saw the dark clouds in 
the stormy sky, she fell into a trance, and her 
eyes moved not from the sight which brought 
on a mystic vision.^ 

The first great Vaishnab apostle of Bengal, 
Madhavendra Puri, had shown this strange 
liking for the dark colour in the 14th century. 
Chaitanya Bhagavatei describes him as fainting 
away at the sight of clouds. Smitten with 

.' Chandi Das, Sahitya Farisat edition, p. 30. 



*itE Maddhi sec* 4i 

a love for this dolour Chaitanya himself at a 
later age embraced the tamal tree with its dark 
blue foliage mistaking it for the god of his vision 
and passed into a trance.^ The dark waters of 
a river brought the vision so often that the 
reader will be at no pains to find instances 
of the wonderful fascination exercised by the 
colour on his mind. 

Chaitanya belonged to the Maddhi sect of 
Vaishnabs. The originator of this sect was 
Madhyacharya born in 1191 A.D. The special 
feature of worship of this sect was the recognition 
of other gods also than Vishnu in the temples, 
where Shiva, Parvati and Ganes 

The Maddhi sect. , . ^ ,~ .,, 

are worshipped along with 
that deity. One of the nine rituals practised 
there by the worshippers is song and dance. 
And in the temple of Uditi founded by 
Madhyacharya, music forms one of the im- 
portant features of service. It will be seen that 
though Chaitanya belonged to the order of 
Madhyacharya, he deviated from it in some of 
the main aspects of their creed. Madhyacharya 
preached an uncompromising dualism ; but 
Chaitanya's doctrine was dwaitadwaitavada i.e., 
dualism and undualism both. According to this 
creed dualism at a certain stage reaches non- 
dualism. Chaitanya and his sect did not lay 
stress upon the omnipotence — the mawaryGr—ot 

1 Govinda Daa's Karcha, p. 120. 



4^ CHAlTAN^A XKl) Htg AGE 

©od^Kead, but on His captivating power by which 
S& draws the soul of niaii to Him. Madhya,i 
eharya etnphasized «iesMJfflrya or manifestation of 
divine power. It will be remembered that 
Gfa'aitanyai' insisted on Rupa's drawing a cleai* 
li«© of demarcation between the hraja lila of 
Erishna arid his mathur lila. In the former 
he is a cowherd playing pastoral games 'with' his 
ibempanions.' But in the lattet hie plays the 
part of a king. The Vrinda grOves with their 
tales of pastotal afEectioii and romance ha,d a 
special charm for the Sect founded by Chaitanya, 
in ' preference to the manifestations of his 
powei- as Almighty Grod, recorded in the legends 
of " Mathura -where he wielded the royal 



Bmt though Chaitanya' belonged to the sect 

"'of Madhyacharya, he seldoto 

mentions the great apostle. 

In' fact I find no reference to Madhy^^hiatya 

(in any Vaishnab work written in Bejigali prior 

to Bhaktiratnakar, compiled at a much later 

period, in the 18th century. AH praise is'bestowed 

on Madhaveridra Puri, the reputed founder of 

the Bhakti cult in Bengal, latterly developed by 

Chaitanya. Chaitanya Bhagavata holds him as 

the QnrvL of the Bhakti-cult in BeitgaP and 

iNarottam ' Das one of the Vaishnab ' leaders 

in the Ifth centuty sings a hymn in praise of 

> Chaitanya Bbagavata, &.ta\ Groswami's bdition, pp. 68-69. 



■mad.hay£;ndra. 43 

Madhaljenilra, Pari calliag him the gioueejf pf 
faith amongst the Vaishnabs of -Bengal.. 

Indeed this man, some of the episqdps^ and 
legends about whose life have been desprihiad 
in my previous lectures, was a great saint whfl 
sowed the seed of that emotional religion qf 
which the harvest was reaped in Bengal in 
the 16th century. He was a Bengali and this 
I have proved else wh,ere. He was an idealist 
in love and had no care for the materisil life. 
Chait^nya Bhagavata describes how he ^ofteij 
passed into trances at the sight of the dark clouds.' 
Cj^aitanya Charitamrita states that he would not 
seqk any help from anyone. In this respect 
he was like the tree described by Chaitanya 
Oh^iritamritaj for even though it may dry up 
it will never seek a drop of water from any pne;i 
Madhav was thoroughly resigned to the will of 
God ; he never cared for the morrow,^ nor even 
for to-day. If any one gave him anything to, 
eat, unsought for, he ate,.if ^none gave j. he fasted; 
for he would never beg anything from any .one. . 
Perhaps this ideal was before Chaitanya wben; 
he said to Barmukhi the harlot " Do not touch 
me, I am untouchable — as I beg alms from 
house-holders," The two beautifuLlegendsj.abput 
Madhavendra, described by me in my previous 
lectures^ prove the devotional spirit of the saint.! 
In the Vrinda-groves Krishna himself is said - 

' Chaitanya Bhagvata, Atul Groswami's edition, p. 69. 
" Medieeval Vaishnavar Literatw'e. 



44 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

to have appeared before the saint and ^ed him, 
as he was fasting, forgetful of all physical pain — 
merged in his trances and love for the god. At 
Eemuna Krishna is said to have stolen thickened 
milk for his devoted follower. In the religious 
literature of the mediaeval world, such legends 
are common. Whatever may be their value, 
there can be no question as to Madhav's having 
been a highly religious soul, worthy of popular 
veneration ; for in India such legends are only 
told of those men whose saintliness of character 
and spirituality are much above the level of 
average men. Madhav always tried to avoid 
worldly fame. When crowds in great numbers, 
filled with admiration came to offer him their 
tribute of respects at Eemuna, he fled from the 
place, but, says the Charitamrita, " Eame follows 
the man of worth who does not seek it, and 
when Madhav came from Eemuna to Puri, he 
found himself already a renowned man there, 
sought for by the king and all the nobility 
of Orissa." Madhavendra Puri was a good poet 
himself, and wrote many Sanskrit verses some of 
which are to be found in the Padavali compiled 
by Eupa Goswami. 

Madhavendra's disciples were already many 
in Bengal, noted amongst whom were Keshav 
Bharati, Ishwar Puri and Adwaita who instructed 
Chaitanya in the ways of Bhakti. Another of his 
disciples was Pundarik Vidyanidhi of Chittagong 
who was held in great reverence by Chaitanya. 



MADHAVENDRA 45 

Nityananda, in the course of his religious tour 
all over India, visiting her various shrines, 
met Madhavendra Puri at Sri Parvat, somewhere 
near Bankot in the Madras Presidency. He 
clasped the feet of the saint and exclaimed "Her© 
is the reward I have at last got for visiting all 
the shrines. I see, Sir, to day your inspired love 
which sanctifies my soul." We also find Madha- 
vendra paying a visit to Adwaita at Santipur. 
Madhavendra had died before Chaitanya was 
born or when the latter was a mere child. So 
he could not see the great Vaishnab apostle; 
but he was so fervently impressed with all that 
Madhavendra had done in inculcating the Shakti- 
cult, that evidences of his extraordinary regard 
are to be met with in many Vaishnab works. 
Chaitanya Charitamrita refers to the incident in 
Master's life where he recites the stianza, 
beginning with 'sjfg fp{ ^tS'^^ written by 
Madhavendra, and declares in enthusiasm that as 
the Kaustuva is the finest of all diamonds, so is the 
stanza the most beautiful of all world's poems. 
He becomes lost in ecstatic joy as he recites the 
sloka till tears choke his voice, and he can no 
longer recite the full sloka but merely says "^f^ 
f^sf ^^ ft^ " and then passes on into a trance. 

The Bhakti cult had thus already secured a' 
firm footing in Bengal and secured considerable 
number of adherents before Chaitanya came to the 
field. Madhavendra was the first to inaugurate a 
a new era in the propagation of this particular 



46 CHAITANiYA 4NB HIS AGE 

fmtA' 'oHieligl^ ill WMeh '4m(itv^& wai» gmen. a 
higbefiplaeeifehian rituals of worshiip. This: band 
oi religionists itnmediatifflyibef ore the advent of 
Ghaitanya was headed by Adwaitaoharya, who 
borit iri 1356 A. D. at Laur^in Sylhet liad 
Migrated to Sdatipuc and settled tlwre in his 
youth, His dootdne xjriginally was the. same as of 
ether savants of the age in India; 'viz^ nondualisra. 
t have already started that pantheism- pr more 
properly' fdwaitavada was favoured hy all Indian 
scholars of the age, but . Adwaita gradually feii 
i ■■ the need of a personal God,^^ 

With: his grace and love* He 
found: < that nondualism had made people little 
better than, sceptics i it; had increased pride in 
them and made them fond of logical, arguments: 
and a display of scholarship, while the fountain 
of spirituality and love had gradually dried up. 
At this stage, he began to preach the Bhakti'- 
cult and some of his disciples, one of whom Was 
a'Mahratta Brahmin, were so disgusted: with- his 
emotional propaganda, thattbey refused to accept^ 
his doctri nes and deserted him . Thougb led away 
to pantheism when he became a scholar in his 
youth, he had in his childhood shown a liking for 
Vaishnavism and emphatically refused to believe 
in caste and rituals of worships. As a child he is 
said to have declared to his mother : — 

frty(.»(kl^ ^ ftws l"^ (Mother, in the worship of 

' Valya-lilai.aiiti>a by Krislma Dm, Canto IV.- 



' AbWAtTA ANti iiARt BAS 4? 

E'rifehlia all ritiials such as initiation^ and takJng 
the sacred thread are quite unnecessary, every 
one is free to worship and caste is no haittier.) ; 

At Laur, when a mere hoy he could by n6 
means he led to bow 'before Kali and suffered 
much perseicution for his refractory conduct. 

Adwaita's father Kuver Pundit was the 
minister of the Raja of Laur. The latter became 
a disciple of Adwaita in after years and took 
the name of Krishna Das and wrote Adwaita's 
biography in 1409 Saka (1487 A.D.) when 
Ghaitanya was a baby, a little more than one 
year old. Adwaita was the title; the real name 
of the saint and scholar was Eamalakshyk 
He was' 32 years old when Chaitanya was^ born. 
It is stated in the Vaishnab works that Chaitanya 
came into the world owing to the constant prayers 
and appeal from Adwaita to ^ the Most High to 
send one who would redeem the world-from the 
seeptical tendencies of the age. 

A band of enthusiastic bhdktas gathered 
round Adwaita at whose house frequent meet- 
ings were held for devising means to inculcate 
the bhahti cult. Of these men Hari Das 
was one of the most noted. He was born 
r''0 at Buran in JessOre and wai 

Han Das. a Mahomcdan ; though later 

writers' have tried to prove that he had been ori- 
ginally of Brahmin extraction, and was merely 
brought up by aH-Mahomedan, older auth^ities, 
however, are unanimous in saying that he 



48 CHAiTAN^A AND HIS AGti 

was a Mahoraedanby birth. The later writers 
have tried to prove his Brahmanic blood for 
the simple reason, that with the growing idea 
of orthodoxy amongst the Vaishnabs, it was 
thought degrading that he who had originally 
been a Mahomedan should be recognised as 
a leader of the Vaishnabs, claiming Brahmin 
disciples. The devotion of Hari Das to Vaishnab 
faith was, as you all know, heroic and worthy 
of a martyr. He was asked by the Kazi to 
renounce the faith of the Kafirs: — "It is a 
great fortune that you have been born as a Maho- 
medan ; how degrading that you should accept 
the religion of the Kafirs," ^ he said. But the 
convert replied, " Though you cut me piece-meal 
I shall not cease to recite the name of Hari."" He 
was led through 23 market-places at each of 
which he was mercilessly whipped by the Kazi's 
order. The by-standers observed this punish- 
ment with great indignation. Some said, " This 
pountry will be destroyed by God's wrath ; some 
cursed the emperor and his ministers ; others 
actually took recourse to force to save Hari Das 
and some fell at the feet of the officers and said, 
' Give him a few mild strokes only, as it is your 
duty to punish him, and we will pay you money .'^ 
Hari Das took shelter in the name of God, and 
such were his faith and joy in the recitation of the 



' Chaitanya Bhagavat, Atnl GoBrrami's edition, p. 118. 
' I6td, pp. 118.121. 



SRIVAS AND OTHERS 49 

holy name that he was unconscious of his physical 
pain." A fuller account of his life will be found 
in my " Ohaitanya and his companions." Hari- 
Das was for a time a guest of Adwaita at 
Santipur. 

The third noteworthy name as exponent of 
the bhakti cult was Srivas of Nadia, who living 
a life of pleasure in his early years, suddenly 
heard God's mandate in a dream cautioning him 
against the sort of life that 
'^"^^' he was leading. An ascetic 

at this stage of his life called on him and 
prophesied that the span of his life extended 
to a year only. This so much enervated him 
that he thoroughly changed the course of his 
life and latterly became steeped in the emotional 
felicities of a mystic. 

There were also several other men who joined 

this glorious band, such as 

other men who Bhuffarva and Gadadhar, Nara- 

hari and Mukunda Datta, 

Sriman Pandit and Sreedhar, and a few others. 

One very curious personality was Pundarik 

Vidyanidhi; he belonged to this new school 

of the bhakti^cult. It is stated of him that he 

usually wore the costume of a prince indulging 

in all sorts of luxuries. He slept on a highly 

polished brass bedstead ; his food was served on 

gold plates and he travelled 

PnndarikVidyamdhi. .^ gtatc-palanquins. He was 

rich and handsome and was therefore always 

7 



56; chaitaKya and his AGIi 

taken for the type of men quite different from 
ascetics and saints. But this outward appearance 
did not' indicate the man truly. He was a 
devotee and, ascetic at heart, though outwardly 
he seemed to indulge in luxuries. Theye were 
moments when he could not put up with this 
ma-sk of worldliness and threw away all the 
rich articles he used, and beggar-like sought the 
grace of God. At such moments he looked like 
the very prince of. ascetics that he really was. 

The Kirtan band, was already at work at 
Nadia. God's name was recited with the sound 
of tabor, cymbal and dance, and already the 
scholars and lay people assembled to jeer at this 
hew spirit of Vaishnavism. In the Kirtan parties 
held by Adwajta at this home, where the famous 
Ishwar Puri was a frequent guest, Mukunda 
Datta of Srikhanda sang praises of the Lord ; and, 
says Chaitanya Bhagavata " as soon as Mukunda 
begins to sing his sweet emotional songs, some 
danced for joy and others wept." Ishwar Puri 
one day listened to these songs and passed into 
a trance. The people had alreiady raised a hue 
and cry against this emotional religion. Chai- 
tanya Bhagavata says " they all ridiculed the 
Kirtan party when they sang their songs. Some 
said ' their religion is a mere plea^ they assemble 
to eat fine meals.' Others said • wh?!;t do all these 
dancings and uproar mean ? They have aban- 
doned the ways qf intellectuail discussion which 
truly become learned nien, an4. dance furiously 



THE NEED OF A SAVIOUR 31 

like savages.' Some said again 'we Hav« 
diligently read the Bhagavata but find no text 
in that scripture which recommends such weeip- 
ing and dance."^ In this band Gadadhar was 
already a prominent man. This young man 
was known for the fervour of his faith when 
Chaitanya as a young scholar was sceptical in 
his views. 

This had been the religious aspect of Bengal 
before Chaitanya's activities were put forth for 
the promulgation of the creed of spiritual love. A 
field was already prepared by these few men. The 
learned discussions, the intellectual subtleties, the 
extensive rituals and the great vanity of learning 
that characterised the citizens of Nadia early in 
the 15th century left a gap in the minds of these 
.few men who felt that all this 
Tertoher"^^^^^ "■ did not point to the right way. 
The soil Was dry, the path was 
dark; who was to fertilize the soil and' illuminate 
the path ? Pantheism had left no room for faith 
to grow. Who was to bring the message that 
man was not himself his God and that he needed 
helplessly the grace and intervention of a saviour? 
This band of workers weeping cried for divine 
mercy and prayed Him for sending some one who 
would wipe away, so to speak, the sophistry of 
the age by his tears of love,, and prove to the 
sceptical people around and to the ritualists that 



I ciiaitanyft Bhagavtlta, Atul Gdswami's edition, pp. '313^214. 



53 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

God was real,— that He might be loved more 
than a man ever loved his wife and son, and that 
rituals were of no value unless they inspired 
bhakti. 



{v) The political condition of the Feriod. 

Hussain Shah, the Emperor of Gour, was at 
first inspired like all zealots with iconoclasm. 
During the absence of Raja Pratap Kudra 
from Orissa in course of his warfare in the 
Deccan, Hussain Shah raided the country and 
destroyed hundreds of its picturesque temples 
and broke and disfigured a large number of 
images of gods and goddesses. Pratap Eudra, 
when he returned to his. capital wanted to retaliate 
these wrongs. He was doubt- 

PrftTBud'a';'' " ■ l«ss a^a'^e Of the f act that one 
of his predecessors had once 
invaded Bengal and defeated the Pathan force. 
He prepared a large force for leading an expedi- 
tion against Gour, but was afterwards counselled 
hot to do so, as it would cause hardship to the 
Hindu population. The boundaries of the two 
kingdoms were, however, clearly defined by the 
terms of peace, and we find the demarcation line 
marked by tridents and watched over by armed 
officers on both sides. While Chaitanya was cross- 
ing this boundary. Ram Chandra Khan, the officer 
of Pratap Rudra, took all possible care, so 
that Chaitanya and his people might escape 



PATHAN OPPRESSION 53 

molestation from the hands of Mahoraedan 
zealots.! Another account states that a high 
Mahomedan official who had the title of Nawab, 
instead of showing any sign of hostility as 
had been expected, was greatly impressed by 
Chaitanya's religious fervour and became one of 
his staunch admirers. There was a prophecy 
current at Nadia, the last seat of Hindu kings 
in Western Bengal, that a Brahmin of that place 
would drive away the Pathans and become the 
Emperor of Gour. We find in many Vaishnab 
works a mention of this prophecy. Jayananda's 
Chaitanya Mangal says that the inhabitants of 

Nadia were at this time skilled 
byHuBsaiaShaii.*' '^ archcrs SO that Hussain Shah 

became actually frightened by 
the prophecy. He ordered a general devasta- 
tion of Nadia and its locality. There is a small 
village near Nadia called PiruUya where the 
Mahomedan army encamped and carried on 
oppressions in the neighbouring localities, 
converting Brahmins and other people to 
Islam by force. " Wherever there stood a 
Banian tree, held sacred by the Hindus, it was 
cut to pieces or uprooted. Hundreds of these 
trees were destroyed. The same fate attended 
the sacred Tulsi plants. The temples were 
broken and their gods desecrated. Bathing in 
the Ganges was prohibited by law." "These 

1 Oh aitanya BLagarata, Atnl Goawami'a edition, pp. 385-586. 



54 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

Mahoraedans," laments Jayananda, " ruined the 
noble Brahmin families of Nadia." Many illus- 
trious Brahmins and amongst' them Vashudev 
Sarbabhouma, his father Visarad and brother 
Vidyabachaspati left Nadia at this juncture. 
Vashudev ^ent to Orissa where Pratap B>udra 
honoured him by giving him a golden seat near 
his throne in his court. Those Brahmins whose 
caste was destroyed by force, have since been 
called Pirili Brahmins ; for though unclean food 
was forced into their mouth and thus they were 
degraded in social scale, they did not accept 
Islam but remained Hindus. The oppressions 
done to Nadia were not novel in this pro- 
vince at the time. "We find in Bijay Gupta's 
Manashar Bhashan written in 1494 A.D., and 
other contemporary works the modus operandi 
of Pathan zealots in oppressing the Hindus and 
making them converts to Islam. The Brahmins 
were not allowed to wear sacred threads. If any 
of them wore a sacred tulasi leaf on his head, he 
was bound hand and foot and brought before the 
Mahomedan Kazi for punishment. Von Neor's 
'Life of Akbar ' refers to the law that was enacted 
by the Pathan administrators that Hindu subjects 
miist open their mouth to receive spitting from 
Mahomedan revenue collectors, should they wish 
to spit in course of their discharging public duties. 
A. reference to such spitting and other humi- 
liating punishments are to be found in many 
of the Bengali works of this period. 



THE ElSlPEBOR'S BEMORSE 65 

It seems that after having committed all 
kinds of atrocities upon his peaceful Hindu 
subjects at Nadia, a spirit of commiseration and 
repentance came upon Hussain Shah. Chaitanya 
Mangal ascribes this change in the spirit of his 
administrative activities to a bad dream in which 
the goddess Kali is said to have threatened him 
with death, should he continue such oppression. 
Whatever it might be, the remorseful emperor 
passed orders for repairing Hindu temples and 
otherwise compensating the losses sustained 
by the Brahmins of Nadia. We find it men- 
tioned in the same Bengali Work that there 
broke out a great famine in the locality of 
Nadia about this time. But in the spring of 
1485 A.D. the agricultural 

Nadia becomes once j-a- p j.i 

more a flourishing city. COnUltlOn OX tJie COUUtry 

changed for the better, and 
the city becoming immune fxova, Mahomedan 
oppression once more attained its old flpurishing 

^condition. From the account supplied by 
Brindaban Das we find that there lived a 
considerable number of millionaires in Nadja 
at this time, When the sky thus assumed a 
serene and cloudless aspect, and the city smiled 
in prosperity, Chaitanya was born at Mayapur, 

. one of its v^ards, in 1486 A.I). 

But the dread of the people for Mahomedan 
oppression had lurked in the minds of the quiet 
Hindus throughput the reign of Hussain Shah, 
and however much he professed friendship for 



56 CHAlTANrA AND HIS AGE 

them, they could by no means be absolutely 
sure of his good will. Chaitanya was advised 
to leave Ramkeli near Gour, " for," said Keshab 
Basu, deputed by the Emperor to enquire about 

Chaitanya, "though Hussain 
of HnssairsLaii. '^^ Shah seems to be well disposed 

to you. Sir, there is no faith 
in this Mahomedan. How can we forget all 
the wrongs that he did to the Hindus of Bengal 
and Orissa, by breaking their temples and gods ? 
There is no knowing when he may change his 
mind."^ The fear of the Emperor sending an 
armed navy against Nadia to suppress the 
sankirtan and oppress its promoters was ever 
in the minds of the citizens. Whenever they 
saw a large boat coming by the Ganges, they 
feared it contained the .king's army, and 
we know how the house of Ramchandra Khan 
of Benapole was once raidedby the royal army 
and its temples desecrated. Though in his later 
years Hussain Shah turned sober and even kindly, 
his cruel nature could not always be suppressed. 
It is well-known that inspite of his loud profes- 
sions of regard for Chaitanya, Sanatan, his minis- 
ter, was sent to jail for no other fault than his 
willingness to follow Chaitanya. Availing himself 
of the absence of Hussain Sha,h from his capital, 
Sanatan fled from the jail having bribed Mir 
Habool the jailor with a sum of Bs. 7,000. 



Chaitanja BhSgavata, Atul Goswami'g edition, p. 426. 



HUSSAm SAHA'S OLD MASTER 57 

Hussain Shah in his early youth had worked 
for sometime as a menial servant in the house 
of one Subuddhi Ray, minister of a former Gour 
Emperor. It is recorded that one day failing 
in his duty he was whipped by Subuddhi Ray ; 
the marks of the whip, it is 

Subuddhi Ray. , . , , 

said, could be seen on his body 
in after years. But save this punishment, he 
was otherwise very kindly treated by his Hindu 
master for whom the Shah entertained high 
respects and gratitude. Many years after when 
Hussain Shah became the Jlmperor of Gour, 
he remembered Subuddhi Ray and treated 
him with' kindness. His queen, however, in- 
sisted on his inflicting some punishment on the 
old man for having once whipped him. The 
Emperor remonstrated, but ultimately the coun- 
sel of the queen was allowed to prevail, and 
Subuddhi Ray was forced to taste unclean food, 
so that his caste was destroyed. He sought the 
advice of stern Brahmin legislators as to how 
his sin could be expiated, and they declared, " the 
only way to save yourself from this sin is to throw 
yourself into fire and be burnt alive." Subud- 
dhi Ray sought an interview with Chaitanya at 
Benares and when he met him, the Master said, 
" Go to the Vrinda groves and lead the religious 
life of an ascetic. This will expiate all sin, if 
any sin there has been on your part for the 
cruelty of others."' 



> Chaitanya Oharitiimfita, Chap. 25, Madhyakanda. 
8 



CHAPTER II 
A Historical review or the BioaRAPHiCAL 

WORKS or THE VaISHNABS — THEIR CLAIMS 
TO RELIABILITY DISCUSSED. 



(a) Murari Gupta's Chaitanya Charitam. 

(b) Nai'ahari Sarkar's songs. 

(c) The Chaitanya Bhagavata. 
{d) Chaitanya Charitamt-ita. 

(«) Lochan Das's ('baitanya Mangal. 

(f) Govinda Das's Karcha. 

(ff) Jayananda''s Chaitanya Mangal. 

(/<) Prettibilas, Bhakti Batnakara and Songs on 

Chaitanya. 
(«') Summary. 
(f) Bibliography. 

'' (a) Mttrari Gupta's Chaitanya Charitani, 

A vast mass of biograptical literature about 
Chaitanya Dev seems to be based on the short 
sketch of the Master by Murari Gupta. This 
book was written in Sanskrit by the venerable 
authorfin response to the enquiries made to 
him by Damodara, a young scholar and an 
ardent admirer of Chaitanya Dev. 



MURARI GUPTA ^g 

Murarl Gupta knew Chaitanya from child- 
hood up. The former had already reached th« 
zeuith of academic renown when Chaitanya was 
receiving elementary lessons in Sansferit Gram- 
mar. There are many incidents in Ghaitanya's 
boyhood showing how naughty he was. We find 
him as a child one day standing behind Murarl 
Maran's intimate ^^'^ niimicing the gesturcs and 
n"awfr life ^^^^^^' "^"^^ments of the veteran scho- 
lar, engaged in an animated 
discvission on Sanskrit logic with another scholar.* 
Later on Chaitanya himself acquired the renown 
of a' great scholar, nay became invincible in 
debates on Rhetoric and Grammar. Though the 
veteran scholar and the young prodigy showed 
almost equal merit and power in their argumen- 
tations this time, soon after Chaitanya's superiority 
became obvious. Having defeated Murari he 
used to jeer at him, saying, " You are a physician 
by caste, look to herbs and plants for curing 
cough and indigestion. The study of the diflBcult 
science of grammar will not suit you."^ 

In later years Murari became a st^auneh ad- 
mirer of Chaitanya, and was so devoted to him 
that he wanted to put an end to his own life 
when he heard that Chaitanya would turn an 
ascetic and leave Nadia.' 



1 Chaitauyamangal by Lochan Das, Bangabashi edition, Adi, p. 49. 

» Chaitanya BhSgavata, Adi. 

' Cl»a''''*''y* Bhagavata, Atul Goswatni's edition, p. 307. 



60 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

' Murari's scholarship was held to be quite 
respectable even in the Nadia of that period 
when the reputed scholars oiE the city com- 
manded an all-India renown. 

All these would make it exceedingly probable 
that what he wrote about Chaitanya should possess 
an unquestionable authority. But we are sorry to 
say that we cannot place much reliance on this 
biography. First of all let us consider the claim 
of the printed edition of Murari's Chaitanya 
Charitam published by the Amritabazar Patrika 
Press, as a genuine work. The book is regarded 
as an authority on all questions relating to 
Chaitanya's life by the orthodox Vaishnabs. The 
date of composition given in the colophon is 
1425 Saka or 1503 A.D., whereas 

not genuine! chapters ^J^g ^^^Jj rglatCS to thoSC CVentS 

also that occurred in 1530 A.D. 
and even later ! So either the date must be 
rejected or the subsequent account given in the 
book should be regarded as a spurious interpola- 
tion. It is natural to expect that if Damodar 
made any enquiry about the incidents of Chaita- 
nya's life to the veteran scholar ; he must have 
done so regarding his childhood, Tor Damodar 
himself knew much more about the Master's 
latter life as his constant companion at Puri, than 
Murari whose knowledge was mainly confined 
to Chaitanya's early life at Nadia. Lochan Das, 
a subsequent biographer of Chaitanya, lays stress 



THE LEGENDS 61 

on the account of his boyhood described by 
Murari and to this he acknowledges his indebted- 
ness.' He says that Murari's Chaitanya Charitam 
dealt with what Chaitanya did " from his birth 
to boyhood," But rejecting the latter portion of 
the book as unreliable, we have still some 
serious objections to accepting the narrative of 
Chaitanya's early life as described by Murari. 

'] his book and indeed most of the biographi- 
cal works of this kind are replete with legendary 
tales and ultrahumah matters to which we cannot 
give any ^credence. We find angels coming down 
to rejoice at the birth of Chaitanya. Sometimes 
Chaitanya holds a discourse with Adwaita from 
the womb of his mother, as St. Paul did with Jesus 
while in the womb of Mary. 
eie^rnt, r^^common Thesc tales havc been told so 
^It^/VsLt^L^d often in regard to the lives and 
prophets. sayings of apostles that their 

repetition in each case must always be suspicious 
from a historical standpoint; We find the same 
thing spoken in regard to Zoroaster who according 
to Greek historians lived about 6000 B.C. and to 
whom, the latest European scholars ascribe an 
age not later than 2000 B.C. We find angels 
visiting Maya Devi when Buddha was in her 

' " mm ^ra ^SPF 5f^ CT ^ I 

The second line seems to refer to the love-calt, preached by Chaitanya 
during his stay at Nadia. See Chaitanyamangal, Satra Khanda, p. 3, 
BaBgabashi Edition. 



62 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

womb and heavenly naessengers congratulating 
Mary at the advent of Jesus. The same tale is 
told of Amina Khatun when Mahomed was about 
to be born. Indeed a wonderful resemblance can 
be easily detected in the very methods and styles 
of description of the birth-incidents of world's 
religious heroes. The sky becomes clear, the air 
becomes wholesome and the evil spirits cease 
haunting the air. All these invariably occur at 
the birth of each of them. 

In India there is an unbroken continuity of 
such legends and tales even up to the present 
moment. Ramkrishna Paramahansa, who passed 
away from this world only the other day, 
has been, of late, associated with legends of 
similar character. Babu Rajendranath Hoy has 
recently published a book called " Sri Ram- 
krisna Bhagabata " in which we find all things 
ascribed to Jesas, Buddha and Chaitanya and 
a hundred other miraculous things, occurring 
at Ramkrishna's birth. These things are ever 
growing in India, and just when I am writing 
these lectures I know that such things are 
being incorporated in a biographical sketch of 
Prabhu Jagatbandhu of Paridpur regarded as 
a prophet and apostle by thousands who find 
divinity in him. In view of the same legends 
being ascribed to apostles ancient and modern, it 
is vain to discuss any historical questions involved 
in them. Murari's book chiefly relates to ac- 
counts of this character. It has been said of v 



CHAITANYA as divine in carnation 63 

Jnaneshaur the Vaishnab prophet of Southern 
India (born in Alandi near Poona in the 13th 
century) that he made a buffalo recite the name 
of God, and we find in the (Dhaitanya Charita- 
mrita, Valadeva Bhattiacharyya referring to his 
having personally seen a tiger reciting the name 
of Hari at Chaitanya's bidding. 

So when one thing, however inconceivably 
hard to believe, has been said of one saint, it 
must be repeated in the case of every subse- 
quent saint in order to give him an equal pres- 
tige amongst deified men and apostles. 

Even when Chaitanya was only 22 years and 
a few months old, the reputation had gone forth 
that he was Krishna incarnate. Govinda Das 
says, when he first visited Nadia to see Chai- 
tanya, " people of the country-side say that 
God Himself has come down to Nadia as the 
son of Sachi ; this has attracted me to the city,"^ 
The reputation was natural enough ; for Chai- 
tanya in his love ecstasies rose to such an exalted 

plane of emotion and so tho- 
_ ^Belief in incama- roughly identified himself with 

the holy name of Krishna, that 
people thought him to be Krishna Himself. There 
is nodonbt that all attempts on the part of the 
people to deify Chaitanya met with a stern 
tebufE at his hands. But after he had left 
Nadia for good, the band of his followers found 
an unobstructed course left to them in their 



> Oovm'da Cas's Earcba, p. 2. 



64 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

attempts to deify him, when the controlling 
hand of the Master was withdrawn. In doing 
so, they themselves raised their position in the 
eyes of people. The companions of God were, 
as a matter of course, acknowledged as divinities 
themselves. Adwaita became Shiva, Nityananda 
became Balarama and Murari Gupta figured 
as the great ape-god Hanuman in popular 
estimation. 

Moreover in those days it was not customary 
with the Hindus to write biographies of any 
individual, other than a saint or an incarnation 
of Godhead. It was not considered becoming 
to record the events of a worldly man's life, 
hoM'ever great he might be from a materialistic 
standpoint. Hence since the days of the songs 
of Pal Rajas and of Goraksha Bijay we have 
not had a single memoir of any great man 
written in Bengali. The renaissance-literature, 
mainly speaking, was restricted to legendary 
accounts of special religious cults. The first 
biography to be written of a young Brahmin 
ascetic who lived in flesh and bodv before the 
people, needed an explanation. The only 
explanation which could satisfy, them in this 
respect was a proof of his divinity. Thus we find 
Murari Gupta striving to explain to Damodara 
why Krishna incarnated himself in Chaitanya, 
by quoting chapters and verses from scriptures, 
^-a course which was latterly followed by 
Lochan Das and other biographers of Chaitanya. 



' TTHB NADIA-TALES 65 

These scholars were all zealots and ^jropa- 
gandists i who did not care " much to record 
historical facts, but strove with all their 
mediaeval learning to find texts for proving 
Ghaitanya to be Krishna himself. Free from 
all propagandism and vanity of Scfablar^hip is 
the one book, Govinda Das's Karcha, where we 
find a faithful historical account of Ghaitanya's 
tour for two years. Nowhere in this book do 
we find Ghaitanya declaring that he was God 
himself. Whereas in the accounts derived from 
Nadia-sources, we find him receiving tributes 
of worship from his devotees, as the supreme 
God of the universe. We have little faith in 
these stories. It may be that when in his 
trances he lost all consciousness of his 
environment some of his followers eulogised 
him or offered flowers at his feet ; and these 
small incidents were latterly magnified into 
tales of Ghaitanya's himself admitting his 
divinity. We know that Govinda Das recorded 
each event that daily occurred during Ghaitanya's 
tour in the Deocan for two years. Therein we 
find Ghaitanya lost in God's love, full >< of 
humility, sweet in his discourses and sometimes 
passing days and nights in mystic vision, uncon- 
scious of the material world; and nowhere 
haughty, proud, calling himself the lord of ,the 
universe and assaulting aged scholars as we find 
him in ^^^ descriptions of Murari Gupta and 
BrindabanDas. In fact this Nadia period of 
9 



66 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

his life is full of wild myths and exaggerated 
stories which originated from an ardent and 
enthusiastic desire of his followers to deify him, 
when he was no longer present there to control 
the ardour of his Bhaktas. In the more faithful 
accounts of him, we find him fasting for God's 
love, — his frequent trances making him lean and 
pale, so that his friends could scarcely suppress a 
tear at the sight of his emaciated figure. But 
we find some of his biographers recording that 
at Adwaita's house he ate meals which many 
men could not by their ioint 

How wild myths '' 

about Cbaitailya ori- efforts. Wc knOW hoW SUCh 
gioated in Nadia . . ,■ - _ - 

legends originated. It was due 
to the ardour of the orthodox souls to prove that 
he was like Damodara, the infant Krisna, who 
could put the whole universe within his stomach 
■ — the brahmandabhcmdodara as he was called. In 
Ghaitanya Charitamrita we find Satir mata, wife 
of Sarbabhoum, making vast preparations for 
his dinner, this was taken objection to by her 
son-in-law Amogha who asked why should there 
be such rich meal for an ascetic. But we are 
not inclined to credit any account that says that 
he ate more than human beings could do, as 
these were evidently manufactured to prove that 
he was " hrahmandabhandodara." On page 155 of 
the Adwaita Prakasa we find a distinct reference, 
shewing that the devotees wished to prove that 
their deified hero could swallow the whole 
universe if he liked, as he was the same as 



"DOl^'T fOlTCH GOOD FOOD " 67 

Bamodara. But in these works, we find truer 
descriptions in which Chaitanya's leanness owing 
to fasts, vigils, his rigid asceticism and refusal to 
accept any rich food, are frequently emphasized. 
He was so particular ahout food that his instruc- 
tions to the young ascetic Raghunath should be 
remembered in this connection : — " Don't touch 
good food, nor wear good apparel.'" Murari Gupta 
believed in all the hearsays and stories that grief- 
stricken Nadia gave rise to, in order to soothe 
herself by indulging in reveries about the divinity 
of Chaitanya, after he had deserted the city. We 
Cannot accept Chaitanya Charitam as a historical 
work. We must always admire the poetic 
beauty of Murari's descriptions and admit 
many facts related by him as true, though 
as a whole it cannot be accepted as a historical 
treatise. This detracts nothing from our great 
regard for the author's scholarship and even 
saintliness of character, though in the light of 
modern standard it must be said that he was 
devoid of what is called the historical sense. 
Amongst these orthodox Vaishnabs it was held 
sacrilegious to disbelieve any story that was 
related of Chaitanya for establishing hi& divinity. 
This accounts for the extravagant things des- 
cribed by the biographer. 



" Cbaltanja Charitamrita,' 



68 CHAltANYA AND HIS AGE 

(6) Narahari Sarkar's Songs. 

Por some of the earliest materials of 
Chaitanya's life we must fall back upon the 
Bono's of Narahari Sarkar of Srikhanda, some of 
which are exquisite from a poetical point of 
view. Previous to the advent of Chaitanya in 
the field, Narahari had composed many songs 
ahout Radha and Krishna.^ But after 1508 A.D. 
when Chaitanya had become lost in God's love and 
attracted admirers— of whom Narahari himself 
was one of the greatest— he took up the 
Chaitanya-theme for his songs. He had already 
achieved renown as a poet before Chaitanya was 
born ; so if we take him to be 25 years 
old in 1486, the year of Chaitanya's birth, 
he may be presumed to have iDeen born 
about the year 1461 A.D. He was a constant 
companion of Chaitanya at Nadia. We refer our 
readers to pp. 100-103 of my " Chaitanya and 
His Companions " for further particulars about 
Narahari. Unfortunately, however, we cannot 
attach much historical importance to the songs 
of Narahari also, though being a close associate 
of the Master, he was pre-eminently qualified for 
acquainting us with particulars about his boy- 
hood and early youth. I have already stated 
that he had composed many beautiful songs 
about Radha and Krishna before Chaitanya was 

' Goura Pada Tarangiui, compiled by Jagatbandhn Bbadra, p. 456. 



NARAHARI'S SOKGS 69 

born,^ and when Chaitanya was accepted as an 
incarnation of Krishna, none was more forward 
than Narahari in preaching the Chaitanya-cult. 
The amours of Krishna with the Gopis and 
sports on the hanks of the Jamuna had so great 
a hold upon the imagination of this poet and 
devotee, that he ascribed all these to Chaitanya, 
however incongruous this might seem to us — lay 
people, Chaitanya was a prince of ascetics ; his 
sexual purity and rigid abstinence are well 
known to all. But Narahari makes the women 
of Nadia yearn after him just as the Gopis of 
the old legend are said to have done for Krishna. 
The poet represents himself as a woman who is 
over head and ears in love for Chaitanya. The 
women-folk of Nadia, by whom the poet pro- 
bably meant the devotees, are spoken of as 
charmed by Chaitanya's handsome person and 
attractive manners and they are represented as 
confessing their love for him in hundreds of 
songs in the same manner as the Gopis did in 
the Bhagavata. Narahari's songs describing the 
pain of the Nadia women at their separation 
from Chaitanya are on the lines of the songs 
of Vidyapati and Chandi Das — sometimes the 
very words bear a strange and unmistakable re- 
semblance. We know that Narahari suffered 

Granra Pacia Tarangini 

by Jagat Bandhn Bhadra, p. 456 



70 CHAITANYA AND HlS AGE 

intensely from his separation from Chaitanya on 
his taking Sanyas; and as womanly love symbo- 
lised best the yearnings of his emotional nature, 
he took recourse to this mode in expressing the 
ardqur of his feelings. It is like the emotion of 
those mystics who accepted Christ as their 
bridegroom. There were many people amongst 
Chaitanya's followers who liked these songs in 
which love for Chaitanya was expressed in the 
language of women. Curiously in some of these 
songs Narahari discourses in a mystic language 
as regards his propriety in attributing love for 
Chaitanya to the women of 
Nadii"''3lr' 'a's Nadia. " Every one." he says, 
Krishna was loved by » knows the crvstal purity of 

theGopiB. •' J 

Nadia women ; they are reputed 
to be virtuous and chaste ; at the same time the 
strict character of Chaitanya who never looks 
upon a woman with other than very proper feel- 
ing, is beyond question. Why then do I write 
in this strain, one may justly ask.'" In veplj 
to this he gives a hint at the psychology of those 
devotees who would express best their tender 
feelings in the language of women. That many 
Vaishnabs do still like to adopt not only tbe 
phraseology of women, but wear their costumes 
and ornaments and assuming their names 
pass for such, is a well-known fact and those 



1 See Ganr Pada Tarangini, Padas Nob. 164, 165, 166, 167 and 17I, 
pp. 229-234. 



LALITA DEVI AND NOLAK BABAJI 71 

who would like to see such devotees with theii' 
own eyes should risit Nadia 

OevoteeainthegQiae . t i-j -r« • 

of women. slvlCl sce Jjalita Devi. Appear- 

ances should not confound a 
visitor ; for Lalita Devi by name and dress is 
to all outward appearances a woman. But this 
person is a young man of the Brahmin caste and 
noted for the saintliness of his character. We 
know that he has been trying to love Krishna as 
a Gopi, and this dress and all he has adopted to 
make himself worthy of Krishna's love. , Another 
saint who practises the tenet of Vaishnab croed 
in this manner is Nolak Babaji, the name by 
which he is popularly called, his real name 
being Harimohan Chakrabarty. He had read 'for 
a time in the M.A. class in the Dacca College, and 
while a teacher in a Grovernment school had 
composed a small poem in English called ' Toy 
for a boy.' His translation of Gray's Elegy into 
metrical Bengali had elicited much appreciation 
from the press about half a century ago. He is 
now verging on 80 and is an inhabitant of the 
village Dhamrai in the district of Dacca. This 
old man dresses himself like a woman, wears 
bracelets in his hands and a beahar in his nose 
like them and sings the praise of Krishna in the 
manner of a Gopi. I do not think the Christian 
people would feel any difficulty in realising how 
all these could be possible. Tennyson's beautiful 
song based on a Biblical text — " Too late, too 
late, thou can'st not enter now " rings in my 



72 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

ears and shows how Narahari's exquisite songs 

should be rightly interpreted and understood. 

Chaitanya is here the bridegroom of the poet- 

„, . , , ., mystic: However much we may 

Onaifcanya the bride- " " 

groom of the poet- appreciate this mode of poetry, 
there is no doubt that this As 
-not the right way to lead to a comprehension of 
historical facts. That this mode of attributing 
a passion for Chaitanya on the part of devotees 
represented as women, did not commend its elf to 
many readers, will be known from the following 
passage in the Chaitanya Bhagavata. It refers to 
the boyish pranks of Chaitanya : — " He indulged 
in such pranks with all, but he was very careful in 
regard to women. In this incarnation (evidently in 
contrast with Krishna) the lord very particularly 
avoided any touch with women. He studiously 
kept aloof from the fair sex. So 

These songs not ,, . i i , • ■■ 

always approved by all wisc men SDouid avoid mcH- 

the Vaishnavas. , . . i . ■, « , , . 

tioning him as a lover ; for this 
is not the right way to sing praises of the lord. 
Though all kinds of praises may be given him, 
yet wise men should describe him as he was.'" 

» 4^s(ti5 5t»t^ ^?fs? ^^ 1W I 

^ c^5( sTt^r istNf lilt 'SR^stn:^ I 
at^c«^8 s»1 ^ftsfl, f^f^ JT's^rtc^ II 

c^it^sf ^im c^ ^ ^ ^tsT II 

^'sttfn« "^^ c^ ^ i«(9tt:«i II 

Chaitanya Bhagavata, 

Atnl Goswami's edition, Adi. 10, p. 110. 



BRINDABAN'S QUARREL 73 

This is evidently a comment on the songs of 
Narahari with whom, it is traditionally knowni 
Brindaban Das had' a quarrel. This passage 
distinctly supports the tradition. The fact is 
the writers often confounded Krishna with 
Chaitahya in their enthusiasm to establish the 
latter's divinity and attributed all things of 
Krishna's legends to Chaitanya, just as some of 
them ascribed to him a hunger that could not 
be appeased by eating enormous quantity of 
food, with a view to putting him on the level of 
brahmcmdabhandodara. 

We find many of these Nadia- tales and legends 
far away from history. They grew like wild 
plants everywhere, as the presence of the 
Master was no longer there to keep the path of 
Bhakti clear from all such outgrowths. It is 
often seen in world's religious history that feel- 
ings of admiration and love on the part of the 
followers of a great teacher, however intense they 
may be, take an uncouth shape when his con- 
trolling hand and ennobling personality are 
removed. 

((?) The Chaitanya Bhagavata. 

Next we come to a consideration of the 
Chaitanya Bhagavata, the standard biography 
of Chaitanya. This book was written in the 

1573 or 40 years after Chaitanya had passed 
awav The inspiration of this book came 
ftom the Nadia-veterans whose imagination was 

10 



74; CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

thoroughly charged with the faith that Ghaitanya 
was an incarnation of Krishna. All the wild 
myths and legends spoken about the Master 
were readily accepted by Brindaban Das whose 
own birth was enshrouded by a supernatural 
tale in which also he believed more than any- 
body else. 

But Brindaban had a power to follow the 

sequence and chronology of events, like a true 

historian, though on account 

'Qaite trustworthy in n i • -i ■ ^ i j. • xi 

the account of minor 01 uis being brought up in the 
'"^^' orthodox circle he shared in 

the belief of the supernatural and extravagant 
things ever spoken of one identified in popular 
estimation with Godhead. It is his perspective 
that gives us a better glimpse of historical facts. 
The Master's sketch is itself sometimes blurred 
by over-colouring. If we look to the subsidiary 
figures — :the attendants of a god or goddess 
made of clay by our potters for worship, we note 
that these are often life-like and true to nature, 
whereas the main god or goddess as the case 
may be, in compliance with time-honoured 
traditions, is made ultrahuman and grotesque 
with eyes that reach the ears and often with 
more hands and head^ than usual. It is just 
the same thing that we notice in the case of 
Brindaban Das. When minor events are described 
incidentally they have all the interest of his- 
tprical facts, but when he speaks of the Master, 
the mythical element is allowed to preponderate. 



KRISHNA AND CHAITANYA 15 

More than Murari Gupta, more than any- 
body else, Brindaban was eager to prove that 
chaitanya the same Krishna was identical with 
asKriahna. Chaitanya. All his inspiration 

comes from the Bhagayata, and in every action 
of the Master, he finds a repetition of Krishna's 
doings on the banks of the Jamuna, however 
inconceivable this may appear to us lay people. 
Oangadas, the teacher of Chaitanya is called 
Sandipani who gave lessons to Krishna as a boy. 
When Chaitanya sits surrounded by his pupils 
in his tole, Brindaban says that he looks like 
Krishna in the Nairaisharanya in the company 
of the Rishis. The girls of Nadia come to 
Sachi and complain that Chaitanya, five years 
old, does all kinds of wicked pranks. They 
supplement their report by the significant 
remark^" Your son's conduct is verily of the 
same kind as we have heard of Nanda's son 
(Krishna).'" A Brahmin guest comes to the 
house of Jagannath Misra and before beginniiig 
to eat, dedicates, as usual with the Brahmins, the 
food to Krishna. Just then young Cha,itanya 
comes and takes a handful from the meal 
and thus apoils it; for no Brahmin would 
eat the remnant of a meal after an outsider had 
eaten froni it. The Brahmin cooks his meal 



(7t^%t C^t^ '^C^ -^^ li"' 

Cbaitanya'BIiagayata, AHi. 



u cHaitanya and his age 

again and then shutting his eyes as before 
mentally dedicates the food to Krishna. The 
imp, who was lurking somewhere near, at this 
stage reappears and suddenly takes a handful 
and flies away and this he repeats a third time. 
Of course he was quite justified in doing so in 
respect of the food dedicated to Krishna, if we can 
only believe that he was identical with that god. 
This is exactly what Krishna did in regard to 
Garga, the sage who had become 

Coincidences with 

the account of the his father's guest for a day. xlll 
these are no doubt told to 
prove the identity of Chaitanya with Krishna. 
A snake is in the room, and Chaitanya as a baby 
is found to make a bed of this poisonous worm 
and sleep on it. This will remind the reader 
of the sleep of Krishna in his Ananta Shayya 
or the bed formed by the snake Ananta. In the 
footprints of the young Chaitanya are the marks 
of divinity discovered by wondering Jagannath, 
his father, and as the parents move about in the 
courtyard, they hear the sound of sacred anklets 
in the room where the baby lies, though he wears 
no anklets on his feet. A baby of five months, 
he kicks from near his bed the pitchers contain- 
ing curd and milk and the parents wonder how 
such a little helpless thing could do so great 
a feat, but this is exactly a repetition of the 
tale of sakatabhanjana — the breaking of the cart 
containing milk and butter-pitchers as related 
of Krishna in the Bhagavata. I may refer to 



CH AITANY A CHARITAMRITA 77 

further incidents of this nature with which 
the Chaitanya Bhagavata is replete, but it is not 
needed after all that has been said. My readers 
will see that the foremost thought in the mind 
of Brindaban Das was how he could best prove 
that Krishna was incarnated as Chaitanya. The 
Vaishnab Masters at Brindaban considered the 
book to be thoroughly successful from this point 
of view and changed its name from Chaitanya 
Mangal to Chaitanya Bhagavata for like the 
Bhagavata this book also was regarded by them 
as an' authentic record of Krishna's doings in his 
incarnation as Chaitanya. 

But as I have already stated that barring the 
account of a supernatural and legendary charac- 
ter chiefly mentioned in regard to Chaitanya, 

the book contains much valu- 
mS^"'"""^'"*"'' able historical information 

about the period it describes, 
and for this it deservedly occupies a high place 
in papular estimation. 

(dy The Chaitanya Charitamrita. 

The greatest work on the life of Chaitanya, 
however, is the Chaitanya Charitamrita of 
Krishna Das Kaviraj, begun in 1574 and com- 
pleted in 1581 A. D. Krishna Das lived a life of 
celebacy in the Brinda groves. 
The Adikhandafniiot ^^^ ^^^^ ^ scholar and devotee, 

legendg. - ■ < ' 

held in high regard by all. 
But from the historical point of view we 



t?8 aCHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

feaiinot i-ely on the book in its entirety. In 
-Writing the first part of the work— the Adi- 
khanda — he had to depend, as he himself 
■aeknowledges, on the accounts of Brindaban Bas 
and other biographers. He accepted the miracles 
' and supernatural tales as they were found in the 
previous books without exercising any discrimi- 
nation. He could not help doing soi- as being 
an orthodox Vaishnab, he could not disbelieve 
the statements of those whom he considered as 
saints and authorities amongst the Vaishnabk. 
But his own weak point however lies in the 
fact that being a great scholar himself he 
represented Chaitanya mainly as a scholar and 

• the founder of a school of theology, though 
■ towards the last Khanda OJiaitanya in his descrip- 

* tiohs gradually asserts himself as a lover of God. 
The great love leading to mystic visions and 

trances gives him a far greater 
co^^B^faStl/t prominence than his scholar- 
™*!inT ""' '"''"'" ship. Chaitanya in this book 

frequently holds learned dis- 
courses and propounds the philosophy of Vaish- 
nab religion to Sanatan, Ramray and others. 
We no doubt find many of his views in these 
instructive discourses but cannot vouch for the 
absolute historical accuracy of some of them. 
We find in this book that Chaitanya, whjLle 
discoursing on theology, quotes Bhaktirasamrita 
Sitidhu— a work written long after the time. 
Similarly at Benares he qudtes Haribhaktivilas 



THEOLOGY OF A LATBR SCHOOL 7«, 

-^a book that was written at a much iater dat©;* ' 
Numerous such instances will be found in: the 
Chaitanya Charitamrita in which Chaitanya 
refers in his discussions to passages written 
by his followers or their descendants in after 
times. The truth is that Krishna Das Kaviraj 
was so imbued with the theological ideas pro- 
pounded by Sanatan, Rupa, Jiva, Kabikarnapur 
and other followers of Chaitanya, that he went 
on quoting chapters and verses from the works 
of these -Vaishnab worthies, most of whom 
were his contemporaries, without remembering 
in his enthusiasm that Chaitanya could not 
probably have quoted extracts from their 
writings. And at the same time it must also 
be stated that all the theological views of 
these great Vaishnabs could not be endorsed 
by Chaitanya for obvious reasons. One funda- 
mental thing should be remembered in this 
connection. The subsequent Vaishnab theology 
was based upon the assumption that Chaitanya 
was an incarnation of Krishna. The theology 
latterly developed a theory that Krishna incar- 
nated himself as Chaitanya in fulfilment of a 
promise he had made to Radha. Radha loved 
him .so intensely that Krishna told her once that 
he would try to requite this great debt of love 
in his incarnation of Chaitanya — that he would 
abandon home for her love, and be lost in mystic 



^ See Mladhyakhanda, Chap. 17. 



80 . CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

vision of her and roll in the dust like a mad man 
sinsins her name. Radha said, " How shall I 
b^r to see you fall down for the sake of my love 
on the dusty ground that will hurt you ? I will, 
therefore, cover you with my body in that iniear- 
natiop of yours so that the ground may hurt me 
and not you my beloved, when you will fall down 
in your trances." So Krishna's dusky colour in 
his incarnation as Chaitanya lay hidden under 
Radha's fair colour, bright as that of the Champaka 
flower. Radha covered him with herself and 
Chaitanya in the eyes of the orthodox Vaishnabs 
represents the united figure of Radha and 
Krishna. These and many such legends which 
in some cases developed into theology by the 
scholarship of learned Vaishnabs could not have 
possibly got any approval from the Master. 
Another theory that the Vaishnab worthies were 
incarnations of the Gopies of the Brinda groves 
formed a part of Vaishnab theology and we find 
in many learned works an attempt to prove it. 
The theological school of Chaitanya's followers 
was founded to a great extent on this theory of 
incarnation to which Chaitanya was far from 
giving even an indirect support. So in many 
points discussed by Krishna Das in his Chaitanya 
Charitamrita we find his account more of a 
legendary than historical character. But it must 
be admitted at the same time that all the 
orthodox biographers of world's saints and 
apostles have this tendency to believe in miracles 



LOCHANA DAS 81 

and legends. We have St. Paul, St. John and 
other writers of the Gospel recording such things. 
If we'ldo not lose our respect for them, and if we 
regard the Lalita Bistara and other works of this 
kind as great authorities, why should we proceed 
in a fastidious spirit in regard to the writings 
of Vaishnab saints? Human mind when it 
comes in contact with extraordinary greatness 
is carried away by admiration, and indulges 
in the belief of things which do not belong 
to this world. We mast not assume an attitude 
of arrogance, and sit in judgment, even on a 
plea of scientific criticism, over the writings 
of saintly men and brand all miracles and 
supernatural events related by them as false; 
but as ours is a historical treatise we must not 
put down anything which is against the light of 
our reason as it is constituted at the present 
moment. 

(<?) Lochana Das's Chaitan^a Marigala. 

One of the main objects which inspired 
Lochana Das in writing his Ghaitanya Mangala 
was evidently to record facts about Narahari 
Sarkar, whose name was left out by Brindabana 
Dasa owing to his quarrel with him, to 
which we have already referred. Following 
his Gruru, Lochana Das cares more for poetry 
than a strict narration of historical facts, 
For -instance the long description which 
11 



8^. CHAITANYA AND HIS AG^ 

Lochana gives of the sweet discourses said to have 
been held by Chaitanya with his 

The poetical ele- . , 

meut shadows the his- wits Vishnupriya on the eve 

torioal facts. <. i • i • tit i . 

of his leaving Navadwip can- 
not possibly have any foundation in fact. Call 
it very exquisite poetry if you like, but it is far 
from what really occurred. Chaitanya here 
takes leave of his wife like a lover burning with 
romantic love, with many a sigh and tear. We 
know Chaitanya was so maddened by God's love 
that the romance of sexual love had absolutely 
no attraction for him. We quote the familiar 
lines of Brindabana Das in this connection : " to 
divert her son's mind to wordly pleasures Sachi 
used to bring his wife, a charming young woman, 
and made her sit near him ; but Chaitstnya did 
not even do so much as glance at her. ' Where 
is my Krishna gone ?' he cried aloud, recited slokas. 
and wept."^ In th(5 Chaitanya Chandrodaya 
also we find him not taking any notice of 
Vishnupriya though she was reputed for her 
beauty and accomplishments. Govinda Das says 
in his Karcha that when the news of his reso- 
lution to take sanyas had spread at Navadwip 
and Bishnupriya wept at the report, Chaitanya 

' " ^l-ttC^ ^fs?^ (21^ f^I^cfe ^K I 
^ttt^ ^^'S (2t^ ^Itff 5t?ni 

Chaitanya BhSgavftta, AAi. 



LOCHANA DAS ' ^'f 

did not show any sign of being at all moved 
by her tears. This was stoic and even cruel, 
but this was a fact. Authentic accounts of his 
sanyas given by other writers do also confirm 
us in the belief that Chaitanya could not give 
such prolific ex:pression8 to romantic love for 
his wife as described by Lochana Das. The fact 
is that this writer never misses any opportunity 
to introduce poetic situations, 
chaitanya's atti- ijj ^jje present case he gives 

tuae towards ms wiie. ■■• " 

such details of what was 
supposed to have passed between Chaitanya 
and his wife in their bedchamber, as none but one 
who overheard the long conversation and recorded 
it then and there, could do. In the description of 
this episode it is further stated that' Chaitanya 
in order to prove to his wife that he was Vishnu 
himself showed her his four arms, two of which 
ordinarily lay hid from mortal eyes. Not only 
in this poetic description but in many other 
accounts he indulged in free imagination' and 
often reproduced legendary tales which 'Nadia 
people were ever fond of hearing about Chai- 
tanya His animated account of Bibhisana's 

visit to Chaitanya at Puri- is 

Bibhisana'a visit, , , , -ri -i i ■ 

noteworthy. Bibhisana was a 
brother of Havana who had obtained the boon of 
immortality from Brahma, the Creator, and there- 
fore he lives through all ages and still reigns in 
Lanka according to orthodox notions. So after 
thousands of years from the time when the great 



84 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

war is said to have been fought by Rama 'at 
Lanka with his help, he comes to Puri about 
the year 1530, knowing that Chaitanya was no 
other than an incarnation of Vishnu and identi- 
cal with Rama to. whom the Rakshasa king was 
bound to pay his homage. I do not know whose 
fertile brain first conceived this fable, but it was 
believed by Murari Gupta, the great scholar, and 
had been recorded in his Chaitanya Charitam 
from which Lochana Das no doubt copied it. 
What I have said above is more or less 
true of all other biographies of Chaitanya. 
The same ardour for believing in the super- 
natural marks the Chaitanya Chandrodaya 
Nataka by Kabikarnapura who records the 
legend of the birth of the heavenly nymph 
Urbashi, and of how Krishna resolved to 
incarnate hiniself as Chaitanya and other 
such stories which carry us far beyond this 
physical plane of ours. Lochana states that 
when Chaitanya in one of his trances pro- 
claimed that he was Godhead, Sachi, his mother, 
bowed down before him and addressed him, a 
Sanskrit hymn. We find in all these the charac- 
teristic excess and prolificness of imagination that 
mark the Nadia tales. In the subsequent career 
of the Master Ave have occasional mention of 
similar legends, but they are not certainly so 
extravagant and numerous as those related in 
regard to that period of his life which he had 
spent at Nadia. The Chaitanya Chandrodaya of 



GOVINDA DAS 85 

Kabikarnapura is a masterly work, and though 
legends and miracles are to be met with in these 
accounts, they are also store-houses of historical 
information which we cannot ignore. 

Though these authors yielded occasionally 
to the general tendency of the age, to a belief 
in the supernatural, they exhibited, however, 
great industry and enthusiasm, inspired by 
love alone, in collecting materials on which 
we must build a historical biography of 
the Master. "Without their aid it is impossible 
lor us to proceed, however greatly we may 
regret their want of historical sense, judged 
by the scientific standard of the modern times. 
And our comm.ent for the purpose of ascertain- 
ing historical facts should not be taken as 
indicating any disrespect for these authors. 

(/) Govinda Das^s Karcha. 

The works, referred to above, seem to have 
been written under the same inspiration. Murari 
Gupta was the man who held the pioneer's 
flag in the field, and what he had written 
was followed more or less closely by other 
biographers, so far, as Ohaitanya's boyhood was 
concerned. All these works are held in high 
esteem and the authority of these is never 
questioned by orthodox Vaishng,bs. But theye 
are two biographical works which do not belong 
to this class. They have never been recognised 
as works of authority by the orthodox people. 



U CilAlTAKlfA AND HIS AG:^ 

Of this the first is Govinda Das's kafcha. It 
was Mfritten in the form of notes taken by the 
author who was a companion of Chaitanya in 
his tour in the Deccan from 1510 to 1511, The 
author says that he took notes every day very 
privately; for the Master would not tolerate 
anyone recording the particulars of his own life 
which might* lead to worldly vanity. It is the 
same spirit that actuated Lokenatha Goswami in 
after-times to request Krishna Das Kaviraj, 

the author of Chaitauya Ohari- 
supers thS" tamrita, not to mention his 

name in the work. Govinda 
Das's karcha is plain history. It holds to us in 
a vivid light what Chaitanya was. It is not a 
scholarly work inspired by propagandism. No- 
where in this book is recorded any fact that jars 
with our historical sense. If the author calls 
Chaitanya here and there as an incarnation of 
Vishnu it is the language of common courtesy 
used by all in that age in regard to him, and 
indeed in regard to all great saints and Sdnpasia 
of that period. There is no mention of six arras 
shown hy Chaitanya to people to show that he 
was the same that had been Krishna and Rama 
in previous Y gas, as stated about him in many 
of his biographies. Nowhere is to be found in 
this hook the extraordinary tale of Chaitanya's 
sowing mango-seeds, aiid like a rhagician creating 
in course of a few minutes trees with ripe fruits, 
as recorded in the Chaitanya Charitamrita. Nor 



GOVINDA DAS 87 

do we find Ohaitanya in this work invoking the 
infallible chakra — the divine weapon— to punish 
the ruffians, and in responsf the mighty weapon 
coming through the air, whirling like a fiery ball, 
as is mentioned in the Chaitanya, Bhagavata. 
Chaitanya does not appear here as the leader of- 
an orthodox coramunityj all attention to laws of 
conduct as laid down in their jurisprudence. In 
fact this one book gives a far truer account of 
Chaitanya than others, blowing how he won the 
hearts of people by his great spiritual force. It 
is for this representation of him in his true 
colour, that the orthodox community was start- 
led at the discovery of the book and not finding 
him as he is sketched elsewhere— the Supreme; 
Baity who could do and undo the universe at his: 
will, they rejected the book saying that it was 
not authentic. There are of course certain, 
incidents described in this book, evidently in 
conflict with those to be found in standard 
'biographies.' The Chaitanya Oharitamrita says 
that the Brahmin Krishnadas accompanied 
Chaitanya in his tour in the Southern India. 
We find, however, in Govinda Das's karcha that 
Krishna Das journeyed only a short distance 
but was required to return, so that Govinda was 
the sole companion of Chaitanya in this tour. 
The orthodox Vaishnabs had refused to believe 
in this statement of Govinda Das. But all 
their arguments have been swept away by a 
flood of evidences that in recent years have 



88 CHAITAlSfYA AND HIS AGE 

come to light. Several very old manuscripts 
of Jayananda's Ohaitanya Mangala confirm that 
Govinda Das accompanied Ohaitanya in his tour 
in the Deccan, and a song by the poet Balarama 
Das who flourished in the 16th century, to be 
found in the work Gourapada-tarangini, compiled 
by late Jagabandhu Bhadra, also substantiates 
this statement. The reason why manuscripts 
of Govinda Das's karcha are 

The genuineness of 

the harcha. Why the uot uiiiaiaerously f ound is because 

orthodox oonimunity j.i ii i 

does not credit it as the orthodox people Want to 
hear that Ohaitanya is Krish- 
na himself more than an account of his love^ 
They want to hear that he is identical with the 
great Hog — the Baraha, an incarnation of Vishnu, 
and could assume the shape any time— that he 
was ready to prove himself to be Vishnu by a 
display of many arms. A simple historical 
narrative does not commend itself to lay people 
or make any - impression on them. For this 
reason the book has not been held in that esteem 
which it deserves ; for simple truths, often the 
highest, are generally ignored by ordinary people, 
who love show more than true merit. Yet 
old MSS. of the work are by no means rare. 
The one that was 250 years old was in the 
custody of late Babu Sisir Kumar Ghose, editor 
of the Amritabazar Patrika, for some time, and 
from another, about 200 years old, Pandit 
Jaygopal Goswami of Santipur had collected, 
the first portion running up to the 51st page of. 



JAYANANDA 89 

his printed edition. Nowhere in the whole 
range of the Vaishnab literature is the true 
greatness of Chaitanya shown with so much 
force as in this book. The minute description 
of the places in Southern India visited by 
Chaitanya will be of great historical interest 
to students of the topography of the different 
parts of India. "We need scarcely say that in the 
present memoir of Chaitanya which will follow, 
we shall depend a good deal on the faithful 
records of Govinda Das who was an eye-witness 
of the events that he describes in his book. 
The language of the book seems to have been 
refined here and there by the editor Jaygopal 
Goswami but there is enough of archaic expres- 
sions to be found lingering in its pages. 

(g) Jayanandai's Chaitanya Mangala. 

The next work to which orthodoxy refuses 
to give its support is Jayananda's Chaitanya 
Mangala, a curious work in which all kinds of 
legends and fables have been given a place 
together with statements of facts. But still it 
differs in some respect from works believed to 
be authorities according to orthodox Vaishnab 
notion. It begins with hymns in praise of 
Ganesh and other gods. In the 

The book does not 

feeiong to the orthodox orthodox works sucn a thing 
would not have been possible 
as their authors would not recognise any god or 
1% 



90 CHAITANtA ANIi HIS AGE 

goddess except Chaitanya and Eadha Krishna. 
We find many facts in this book not mentioned 
in other biographies. For instance there is 
the important discovery made from this book 
that Chaitaiiya's ancestors belonged to Orissa. 
The manner in which Chaitanya passed 
aWay from this world is a revelation which we 
owe to this book alone. The political condition 
of Navadwip immediately before the birth of 
Chaitanya, the origiri of Pirili Brahmins, the 
fact of Chait£tnya''s first wife Laksmi having a 
maid-servant named Chitralekha and his being 
attended to as a baby by a nurse named 
Narayani, — of his meeting at Gaya a great sage 
named Munindra who had observed the vow of 
muteness for 12 years,^ — of Chaitanya's having 
a dog which he had named Gangadas, — rail these 
and many small details of this nature are to be 
found in this book alone and not in any other. 

Though Brindabana's Chaitanya 
new;z,?:^aMon."'"'* Bhagavata had heen written a 

few years before this work, and 
this Jayananda himself admits, we fi!nd the book 
riot based on Murari's Chaitanya Charita, as 
Chaitanya Bhagavata, Chaitanya Charitamitra 
and some other works are — I naean as far as the 
account of the Master's boyhood is concerned. 
It is a truly independent work differing in some 
respects from those works iii the matter of 
chronology of events and other particulars. For 
instance in this book it is mentioned that 



JAtANAMDA 9i 

Chaitanya was a bhakta and lover of God ifrom bis 
boyhood, whereas it is stated in all the standard 
biographies that a love for God dawned on his 
soul for the first time on the eve of his paying 
a visit to Gaya, The latter is perhaps the more 
reliable account, but whether we accept Jaya- 
nanda's views or not in regard to tarious points at 
issue, there is no doubt that he presents to us 
facts and incidents not following the beaten track, 
but independently and this is a great relief to 
historical students, giving them an opportunity 
to form an impartial judgment by discussing 
conflicting statements. And it is exactly for this 
reason, for Jayananda's asserting himself in his 
, own way in describing his narrative without fol- 
lowing Vaisnava canons, that makes the orthodox 
people reject his authority. Jayananda is some- 
times carried away by emotional 
bWed":^L m™' poetry and sometimes by faith 
in supernatural tales about the 
subject of his memoir, but he furnishes historical 
side-lights on obscure points and presents. to us 
facts not hitherto known about Chaitanya. Eor all 
these reasons and' for the fact that his work is ori- 
ginal, not belonging to the class approved by the 
orthodox school, we consider it to be a valuable 
contribution to the Vaishnab biographical litera- 
ture. Jayananda's Chaitanya Mangala was writ- 
ten about the year 1575 at the command of Pa.ndit 
Gadadhara, a favourite companion of Chaitanya 
during his boyhood and early youth at Nadia. 



&2 cHaitaNya aKd his age 

(h) Vrembilasa, Bhaktiratnakara and Songs 
on Chaitanya. 
There remain to be coasidered some historical 
works such as the Prembilasa, the Bhakti- 
ratnakara, the Anuragballi and books of this 
class in which incidentally many events of 
Chaitanya's life are described, Prembilasa was 
written about the year 1640. Bhaktiratnakara 
about 1725 and Anuragballi in 1696. In 
these books though now and then we come 
across many new facts in regard to the Master's 
career, he is represented as God and Saviour 
with much over-colouring. But we shall use 
such materials to be found in them, as will help 
us in making a complete research in this field. 
The statements made in the different works 
mentioned by me are sometimes of a conflict- 
ing nature. Por instance the 
Bhaktiratnakara says that Chai- 
tanya took- leave of his mother on the morning 
of the 1st of Magh, Sak 1430, and proceeded 
towards Katwa for Sanyas; but Jayananda's 
Chaitanya Mangal says that for 3 days the fact 
of his leaving Nadia was kept concealed from 
her by his friends. We shall deal with these 
small questions in their proper place. 

We have however omitted to speak of one 

important mine of informa- 

ohaitenyrsongs."'' ° ^^on about Chaitanya. These 

are songs about him written 

mostly by Narahari and Basudeba Ghosh— his 



SUMMARY 93 

contemporaries. These should not be mistaken for 
stray lyrical pieces composed by the poets for 
describing momentary sentiments of devotion 
or love. They are oftentimes threaded together 
in such a way as to describe some of the entire 
episodes of his career. Many of these are 
masterpieces of poetry. They create pathos of 
indescribable sweetness, reproducing situations 
which become bright with the glimmer of poetic 
light upon them. Having been written by those 
who had a direct and personal knowledge of the 
Master's life, they possess all the interest of 
real history and should not be mistaken for 
mere products of poetic fancy. Often times 
Chaitanya appears in these songs like a picture 
in life-like vividness ; the charm of reality is 
thus heightened by the touch of poetic hand 
that drew these sketches. We shall take help 
from this poetic treasure in the present memoir 
of the Master as we go on. 

(ij Suminary. 

Now to recapitulate some points discussed in 
the foregoing pages, we have classified our 
materials in three groups. Firstly, the anecdotes 
of Chaitanya's boyhood which were magnified 
into supernatural tales and sometimes owed their 
existence to the fancy of the pious people who 
wanted to prove him to be an incarnation of 
Vishnu. The most noteworthy works of this 



H CiiAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

class are Murari Gupta's Chaitanya Charitam and 
the karchaov notes by Swarupa 

The Nadia legends. •' ^ 

Damodara. The writers of 
standard biographies of Chaitanya — Brindabana 
Das, Krishna Das Kaviraj and Lochana Das — 
have put implicit faith in these tales and added 
to them what they themselves heard from 
country people, while describing the Master's 
boyhood and early youth before Santfas, spent at 
Nadia. In this period of his life the supernatural 
element predominates in his memoirs, due to an 
ardent desire on the part of his biographers to 
make him an Avatar in popular estimation. 
These tales went on increasing as no one at 
Nadia and in the adjacent locality had the heart 
or wish to contradict them for they were meant 
for the glorification of Chaitanya. On the other 
hand there was a natural tendency in all of them 
to credit miracles which would raise Chaitanya 
to the level of Krishna. 

Secondly, the description, of the latter part of 

the Master's life is contained chiefly in the 

Chaitanya Charitamrita. Here the supernatural 

element is not at all very prominent but we find 

Chaitanya in these accounts 

Vais'na va theology 

of a later school attri- somctimes reduccd to a product 

buted to Chaitanya. j; i.u j.u i • i u i au j. 

of the theological school that 
latterly arose with its centre in Brindaban, 
having established theories of incarnation and 
their necessary CQrrolaries, which Chaitanya, 
had he liyed at the time, could not have pos^bly 



SUMMARY 95 

endorsed. But inspite of this shortcorning the 
Chaitanya Charitamrita is the most complete 
and authoritative biography of Chaitanya. 

And all these works bearing, as they do, the 
stamp of a particular theological school of the 
Vaishnab community, have a special claim to 
the regard of historical students, as they unfold 
the various stages of progressive Vaishnavism in 
Bengal. And let me repeat here that prominent 
amongst them is the Chaitanya Charitamrita, 
which for its exposition of Vaishnab Philo- 
sophy is perhaps unmatched in the world's 
theological literature of the 16th centuryi 
Tlie Chaitanya Chahdrodaya of Kavi Karnapur 
and Chaitanya Bhagavata of Brindaban Das are 
both monumental works which should be given 
a place in the field of Vaishnab theology, next 
only to Chaitanya Charitamrita. 

Thirdly, we have a few works, and it is 
Govinda and jaya- unfortunato that there are not 
°*"'^^- too many good works of this 

kind, which do not strictly belong to the Vaishnab 
school and which do not show allegiance to the 
rules and canons of any particular theological 
section. Govinda Das's karcha and Jayananda's 
Chaitanya Mangal are the two books that breathe 
an air of freedom from convention, and on 
account of their presenting us with new angles 
of vision, haTe a special attraction. It is 
Jayananda's Chaitanya MarigEll, as has been 
already stated, that has given us the information 



96 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

that , Chaitanya passed away from this earth, 
being attacked by an inflammatory fever due 
to a hurt he received on his right foot while 
dancing at Puri during the Car festivities. All 
other authors are silent on this point, and their 
silence lends an indirect support to the popular 
legend that Chaitanya passed into the image of 
Jagannath, as his corporal body consisted merely 
of spirit. There is another tradition current, no 
doubt created by the priests of the rival temple 
of Gopinath, associating the same legend jvith 
the image of the latter god. One author seems to 
indicate that this legend is true by saying " we 
lost him in the temple of Gopinath." When 
there was nothing to guide us to truth on this 
point one man at least was found speaking what 
appears obviously as a fact. Regarding the notes 
of Govinda Das, we consider them the most 
reliable though they record events of the Master's 
life for the brief period of two years only. 
Though this author was called an illiterate fool 
by his wife Sashimukhi, we find him possessed 
of a superior literary talent, developed no doubt 
by the impetus he received from association 
with the Master. He is so unassuming that 
nowhere does he assert himself with his views 
in the name of Vaisnava religion and following 
Chaitanya with dog-like fidelity, as he did, he 
recorded his trances and sayings in life-like 
vividness. He has not one word to say about 
his own high character, though from incidental 



StJMMARY 9* 

remarks we find that he was a conqueror of the 
flesh like a true Yogi and devoted to the Master 
as a very few of his followers have ever been. 
Govinda Das even tries to expose himself to 
ridicule by showing himself to be a glutton, but 
one who carefully reads his pages will find him 
a most instructive companion,^a true guide to 
the Bengali Vaishuava life of the 16th century. 

(I) BiBLIOGKAPHT 

For presenting a memoir of Chaitanya in the 
following pages, I have, among other books, madp 
a thorough historical study of the following old 
works : — 

1. Songs of Narahari, Govinda Ghos, Basu 

Ghos, Gopala Basu, Narahari Sarkai', 
Parameswar Das, Nayanananda, Rai- 
sekhar and others. 

2. Karcha by Govinda Das (1509 to 1511 A.D.) 

3. Chaitanya Charit by Murari Gupta. 

4. Chaitanya Chandrodaya Nataka, and its tran- 

slation into metrical Bengali by Premadas. 

5. Svarupa Damodar's notes. 

6. Chaitanya Bhagavata by Brindabana Das. 

7. Chaitanya Mangala by Jayananda. 

8. Chaitanya Mangala by Lochana Das. 

9. Chaitanya Charitamrita by Krishna Das. 

13 



S8 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGM 

10. Balya Lila Sutra by Lauria Krishna Das. 

11. Advaita Prakasa by Isana Nagara. 

12. Prembilasa by Nityananda Das. 

13. Bhaktiratnakara by Narahari Ohakrabarti. 

14. Narottambilasa by Narahari Ohakrabarti. 

15. ■ Abhirama Lilamrita. 

16. Anuraga Valli. 



CHAPTER III 

Ancestry, Birth and Childhood 

Chaitanya's father Jagannatha Misra removed 
from Dakha Daksin, a village in the district 
of Sylhet (Jaypur of the same district according 
to Jayananda) and settled at Nadia, vphen he 
was about 25 years old. This must have taken 
place at about 1460 A.D.' We have references 
in many works to his marriage at Nadia 
with'^Sachi Devi — the accomplished daughter 
of Nilambara Chakrabarti. lie had, there- 
fore, settled at Nadia prior to his marriage. 
Nilambara Chakrabarti himself was originally a 
Brahmin of Sylhet. It appears that he and 
Jagannatha Misra came down and settled at 
Nadia about the same time. The chief object of 
these] people of Eastern countries for coming to 
Nadia was of course the completion of their 
education ; for Nadia was one of 
Nadia, a seat ipf ^jjg greatest seats of learning in 

learning. o o 

India during this period. Says 
Brindabana Das, " There is no end of scholars in 
this town. Hundreds of professors and students 
bathe in the Ganges every day. The enthusiasm 



» Mr. Underwood in an article in the Calcutta Keview says that 
Sachi Beyi was 67 years old in 1486 when Chaitanya was born. For 
not giving ns any reference as to his anthority-and for some 
anomalies which it involves we cannot accept this statement of Sachi 
Pevi's age to be trne. 



loo CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

for learniag is so great that eyen a boy 
will come forward to match his lance with 
veteran professors."* We all know that the 
school of logic founded there by Basudeva 
Sarbabhaum and latterly developed and richly 
contributed to by Raghunatha Siromani attract- 
ed pupils to this academic centre from all parts 
of India. In jurisprudence, the word of 
Eiaghunandana who wrote his famous Astaving- 
sati Tatva about this time has become the 
one law for all people of Bengal. 

Jagannatha Misra and Nilambara Chakrabarti 
as also raany other scholars of Sylhet were no 
doubt attracted to Nadia as students for receiving 
academic laurels from this reputed field of learn-" 
ing. The reason of their finally settling.at Nadia 
was, however, different. Says Jayananda refer- 
ring to this point : — " There were famine and 
drought of a terrible kind in many parts of the 
district of Sylhet at this time. The political 
condition of the country had grown very unsafe ; 
robbery and theft had become the order of the 
day. People fled to different 

Famine in Sylhet. 

countries at this juncture. 
Nilambara Chakrabarti and Jagannatha Misra left 
their native villages and settled at Nadia at this 
time ; for, in the district of Sylhet no good and 
honest man could stay for a moment. "^ 

^ Chaitanya Rhagavata, Adi Kanda. 
' Chaitanya Uangala b^ Jayanapda, 



UPENDRA MISRA 101 

Jagannatha Misra's ancestor Madhukara 
Misra, a Vaidic Brahmia of Batsayana Gotra, 
was originally an inhabitant of Jajpur in Orissa. 
Jayananda tells us that he too had left his native 
city, for Raja Bhramarabara 
Syihet? ^■'^"'^ ° the king of Orissa, had made it 
impossible for honest Brahmin 
folk to live at Jajpur by his capricious adminis- 
tration. Madhukara Misra left his native 
country about the year 1440. 

I have appended a table showing the 
pedigree of Chaitanya in my work " Ohaitanya 
and His Companions " (p. 218). This pedigree 
was collected from some standard works of the 
Vaishnavas. Jayananda also gives a pedigree 
in which he says that Janardana was the grand- 
father of Ghaitanya ; but the forriier was his 
uncle. In all standard works we find Upendra 
Misra to be Chaitanya's grand-father. There 
could be possibly no mistake about the name of 
Jagannatha Misra's father in such well-knowh 
Vaishnava biographies as Chaitanya Bhagavata 
and Chaitanya Charitamrita. In respect of the 
pedigree it is always safe to trust the version sup- 
plied by the orthodox community ; for they were 
more in touch with the relations of the leaders of 
their sect than lay men. So the pedigree found 
in Jayananda's book cannot be relied upon. 

Jagannatha Misra was junior by some years 
to Advaita Acharyya who was born in 1434 A.D. 



102 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

We find the Misra bowing down before Advaita 
as a younger Brahmin does to another older than 
himself. Chaitanya was the last of the 8 issues 
(9, according to Jayeinanda) that Jagannatha 
Misra had by Sachi Devi. Takingfjagannatha 

to be 48 years old (Advaita was 
aboufust^D.^""' at the time 52) at the time of 

Chaitanya's birth, we may ap- 
proximately accept the year 1435 as the date 
of Jagannatha Misra's birth. We are quite 
confident that the date is not very far from the 
actual year. 

It is stated by all authorities that Jagannatha 
Misra was a scholar of some renoAvn at Nadia. 
He had obtained the title of P^irandara for his 
learning. But he was a poor man. He once 
said to his wife " Just see, though I am a scholar 

I have no money." When 

Jagannatha, a learned Qhaitanya neglcctcd his duticS 

as professor owing to his great 
emotional sentiments and love for God, his old 
teacher Gangadas reproached him in this way :^ 
" it is not proper that you should neglect these 

' Chaitanya Bhagayata, Adi. 



iAGANNATHA'S HAND-WRITING 10^ 

duties. Just remember your father Jagannatha 
Misra and your grand-father (on mother's side) 
Nilambara Chakrabarli. They were all learned 
men. Born of this illustrious fcimily, why 
should you behave in such an unbecoming 
manner ? If for seeking God, learning is to be 
eschewed, were not your father and grand-father 
learned and religious at the same time ?" 
Murari's Ohaitanya Charita and Kavikarnapura's 
Ohaitanya Ohandrodaya also refer to the great 
learning of Jagannatha Misra. 

But a more positive information is at hand. 
A copy of the Adiparva of the Sanskrit Maha- 
bharata written in Jagannatha Misra's own hand 
bearing his signature and the date of copying, is in 
the possession of Mahamahopadhyaya Ajitanatha 
Nayaratna of Nadia. The, date 

Mahabharata copied . £> n r\ / a 

by Jagannatha in 1468 IS Saka 1390 (1*68 A.D.) Or 

17 years before the birth of 
Ohaitanya. The handwriting is beautiful and 
bold and looks like a thing of yesterday; the ink 
is bright and its lustre has not diminished after 
450 years. The copy is free from errors, and 
this is a thing not l;oo often found in the copies of 
Sanskrit works. Curiously, very few Bengalis 
have any knowledge of the existence of this rare 
and precious manuscript. A few years ago Lord 
Carmichael paid a visit to the Pandit's house at 
Nadia with the object of seeing this sacred book. 



' Cbaitanya Bhagavata, Adi, p. 149. k. G.'s Edition. 



l6i C3HAITANYA Al^D HIS AGE 

This copy of the Mahabharata substantiates the 
statement made by biographers that Jagannatba 
Misra was thoroughly learned in Sanskrit ; not a 
single grammatical error or spelling mistake is 
met with in this large volume. Such mistakes 
are found in abundance in the ordinary copies of 
Sanskrit works. 

Jagannatha Misra was contented with' his 
poverty. His scholarship only confirmed him 
in his faith in the fairness of divine dispensation 
and made him humble and meek. His eldest son 
Bisvarupa, born in 1465 A.D., adopted the vow 
of Sanyasa when 16 years old and left him for 
good. It was on his marriage day, that the boy 
thought that it was not the right thing to marry 
as he had resolved to pursue a high religious ideal. 
But he ventured not openly to 
• "^^ ^'^^^ °* ''^^ stand against the wishes of his 

parents. ~ 

parents. He crossed the Ganges 
in the night with the sound of drums and 
other musical instruments at his house 
still ringing in his ears. He went far away 
after having taken the vow of Sanyasa but no 
one yet knows where and how he lived and 
died. We know, however, that on his joining 
the order of Sanyasis he took the name of 
Sankararanya Puri. The feeling of grief that 
this occasion gave rise to may be easily conceived. 
Sachi Devi was completely overpowered by her 
sorrows, but Jagannatha Misra was stern as Job 



THE BOY GOES ASTRAY iaS 

of the Old Testament. He said in aimpst the 
very language of the Jewish saint "Krishna hap 
given and Krishna has taken. May his will he 
fulfilled." Though he took this philosophical 
view of life like Job, his firmness of character 
gave way for a time. And we can well sym- 
pathise with this miserable Brahmin who had 
to fight continually with an untoward fate. 
Seven daughters had died ; the promising son 
who was to he the supporter of his parents in 
old age was lost for ever, yet he continued in 
his resigned faith to suffer without a murmur. 
But when Chaitanya only five years old had ac- 
quired the alphabet within two or three days and 
showed a wonderful cleverness, the father said 
"ho, he must not go to school any more." The 
medieval learning inspired young learners with 
monkish ideas of renunciation and asceticism. 
Jagannatha Misra said to Sachi Devi " if this 
boy becomes a scholar, he will feel a contempt 
for worldly pleasures and leave home as a 
Sanyasi, it is no good educating him. Let him 
be illiterate, but let him remain at home." 
Chaitanya grew to he a wild boy being thus 
freed from the hands of the village school- 
master. He began to do all wicked things in 
the company of the mischief- making imps of 
the locality. This became intolerable to a 
degree, and the honest neighbours who had to 
suffer for the child's wicked acts appeared in a 
14 



106 chaitaKya Akb HIS kbri 

body to Jagannatha Misra and requested him not 
to allow the child to go astray in that way but to 
send him to a school. They all reproved him for 
his foolish fears that education would make his boy 
turn a Sanyasi. Jagannatha Misra felt the force 
of their argument and sent young Ohaitanya to 
school ag9,in. Jagannatha died of fever in 1506 
A.D. when Chaitanya was only 20 and had not 
yet completed his education. Sachi Devi, as has 
been already said, Avas a daughter of Nilambara 
Ghakrabarti, originally a native of Sylhet. 
Gdvinda Karmakar describes her as "of a quiet 
temperament and of a very short stature." As 
a doting mother she had a 

Advaita Aoharyya . i . 

held responsible by great dread for Advaita 
A'charyya's teachings to which, 
she imagined, her young sons listened with atten- 
tion and confidence. He had no doubt imparted 
some of his philosophical views to Bisvarupa, 
Ohaitanya's elder brother, and Sachi held hiin 
responsible for turning the head of Chaitanya 
also. We find her openly charging Ad waita with 
putting the idea of Sanyasa in the head of her 
son Biswarup. " Bright as the moon," she said, 
"was that boy of mine, and Advaita's council 
turned him out from home as Sanyasi. And not 
satisfied with doing so he is now bent on leading 
astray this young boy of mine and ruining all 
happiness of my life. The lad spends his whole 
time with the old man and never looks at my 



ADVAITA ABUSED 107 

^aughter-in-law."i Then with a pun on the 
word Advaita (lit. professing the pantheistic 
faith) she said " who calls him Adaitya ? He 
should rather be called a Daitya " (lit. a demon) 
and she habitually called the veteran scholar by 
the latter name. It is related in the Chaitanya 
Bhagavata, Bhalctiratnakara and other books 
that she was afterwards made to apologise to 
Advaita for doing so. 

Her quietness of temperament, referred to 
in Govinda Das's harcha, is proved by the fact 
that she finally gave her permission to Chaitanya 
to follow his resolve of talcing Sanyasa, however 
much she suffered for it. She was a very 
sensible woman and when Chaitanya eloquently 
described what Indian mothers had suffered in 
the past for righteousness and truth, — how 
Kausalya had given permission to Kama for going 
to the forest and how Aditi and Daivaki had 
made their natural feelings of love and affection 
subservient to their sense of duty when their sons 

^n ?r^ "p^ ^ (.^^ ctff^t 'sit^ I 
(71^ ^K«t 1^ <iit ^ftw^ '^rtt 
5® jfsr iii?F *tjq ^f?fiii ^tft^ 

Clifii. Bha., p. 319. 



108 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

were called away from them, she coiildt not resist 
the noble appeal though she had argued with 
him for a while saying " what is that religion 
that cbndones cruelty to parents ? You want 
to explain to the world the truth of religion! 
How dd you think yourself flt for doing so 
when you fail to do your duties to your old 
mother?"^ Though she was persuaded to give 
the permission at last, she became thoroughly 
overcome by grief for the time being. The 
Chaitanya Bhagavata says, she fasted for twelve 
days after Ghaitanya had left Nadia. The 
interview between Chaitanya and his mother 
shortly after the fornier's Sanyasa at Santipur is 
one of the most pathetic episodes described in 
his biographies. At her house deserted by 
Chaitanya she lived a wretched life of sorrow. 
One day we find her weeping over a particular 
nieal that she had prepared to be served to the 
family-god. She wept and said : "He liked this 
sort of meal. Who is there now left to eat 
it now ? " 

c^m^ sf'^tcss ^fsf sf^ "^^^ II , 
f^'f'^^^l *tft ^1% 5^ 1t^ I . 

Chai. Bha., p. 389, 



CHAPTER IV 
Birth AND Boyish Frivolities, Editcation, and 

FOUNDING OF A ToL. ThB DEFEAT OF THE 

, Scholar Kesava Kasmiri 

Birth and Boyish Frivolities. 

Chaitanya, according to all Vaislinava biograp- 
hers atid historians, was born on the full moon 
day of Ealgun, 1407 Saka, corresponding to the 
18th February, 1486, at 6 p.m. There was a lunar 
eclipse at the time, and just when the planet 
came out free, bright in its full 

Birth. . 1 , , 

majesty, and the people as usual 
in this country after an eclipse, cried aloud God's 
name on all sides, Chaitanya came to the world 
amidst this general jubilation and recitation of 
the holy name. According to Jayananda the 
nurse who took charge of the baby was one 
Narayani. It is stated in the several standard bio- 
graphies that Sita, the wife of Advaitacharyya, 
a,nd Malini, the wife of Sribasa, paid a visit to 
the house and presented the baby with many 
ornaments on tbe 6th day of its birth. 

The boy was given the name of Nimai. The 
biographers differ as to the significance of the 

name. One of them says that as 
Jl\°^^. "' *'' Sachi's children were generally 

very short-lived, this humble 
name was given to ward off all evil influences; 



110 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

for death or witches might not take notice of one 
who was called by such a humWe name. Accord- 
ing to another the baby got fever and the 
mother was advised to keep it under a Nim tree 
for some time, as the air that passed through 
Nim leaves acted as a cure in fever cases. 
Being placed under the Nim tree he was called 
Nimai. On the 20th day of his birth the boy 
was given a dignified classical name, viz. — Bis- 
vambhara or ' the nourisher of the universe.' 

Nimai, as he was generally called in his early 
years, often went to the house of Advaitacharyya_ 
to call back his brother Bisvarupa who used to 
receive his lessons from that veteran scholar, 
Nimai was only five years old at the time and 
ran ahead of his elder brother who was then 
a lad of sixteen and led him homeward by 
holding the edge of his dhuti. This picture 
of the boy is sketched by Brindaban Das in a 
charming language. 

We find Nimai sometimes carrying out 

small orders of Srivasa who was then already an 

old man. But more often do we find him doing 

all kinds of mischievous things that ever a 

boy of five did. But how far 

The childish pranks. p i . i . , 

the descriptions of his boyish 
pranks are genuine and how far they are 
a repetition of the stories about Krishna, 
attributed to him for establishing his identity 
vith that god, cannot be ascertained. For if 



■tHE fRA-NKS ill 

Krishna followed the footprints of the birds on 
sand or in his infant freaks stole butter and 
milk from neighbours' houses, there is no reason 
why other children before or after him would 
not do the same thing. But excluding all these 
little acts which savour of the Bhagavata, we 
may take many others related of him as un- 
questionably true. We find Nimai entering 
temples in the evening and for a mere fun put- 
ting out their lights to the extreme irritation of 
the priests. The pious Brahmins sat on thebanks 
of the Ganges with closed eyes in a prayerful 
attitude, and Nimai suddenly came, sprinkled 
water on their faces and disappeared as suddenly 
as he came. Sometimes a Brahmin stood in 
the Ganges in knee-deep water aiid said his 
prayers ; the little boy pliinged into the 
water and carried the man forcibly by one of 
his legs. Sometimes he threw water into the 
ear-hole of an urchin of the same age ; and at 
others sprang suddenly on the shoulders of a 
man and sitting between them declared himself 
to be the great god Siva. Here did a Brahmin 
with a copy of the Gita in his hand shut his 
eyes meditating on the holy text, the boy from 
behind snatched the book and fled. The little 
girls who came to bathe in the Ganges had 
similar treatments from the boy. He put the 
thorny okra seeds on their heads from which it 
became difficult to extricate their hair and they 



IT2 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

went iii a body to Sachi and complained of her 

^on's wicked acts. One said, "Look here mothers 

he wants to marry me I " Nimai was only five 

years old at the time ! It was a frequent thing 

for the young chap to hide himself in a room 

and give notice of his presence by mimicking the 

sound of the cuckoo. The plays generally 

played by Niiiiai and his comrades were the 

familiar geru play and the monkey play in 

which the boys showed their experlness by 

j limping or standing »on one leg. The swimming 

in the Ballala Sagara was one of the favourite 

spbrts. Nimai is described at this age as a 

very handsome lad with a red-coloured dhuti 

on and three braids of hair containing five small 

gold jhapas (pendants) that added grace to his 

lovely face. One day he placed himself amidst 

unclean refuses in a drain which a Brahmin 

would not touch and when reproved by his 

mother, said " Mother I am an illiterate fool, 

what do I know of what is clean or unclean ? 

I do not share your prejudices. All places are 

alike to me." His abundant boyish energies found 

their expression chiefly in mimicry and jokes, 

to one of which I have already referred. We have 

already mentioned how he stood one day behind 

the veteran scholar Murari and moved his head 

and hands exactly like the latter, engaged in 

an animated discussion on some learned subject 

with another scholar. 



NIMAI— AS A STU DENT 113 

Education. 

When Jagannatha Misra was persuaded by 
bis'neighbours to put Nimai in some school for 
reforming his conduct, the first tutor appoint- 
ed for him was Visnu Pandit from whom 
he learned the alphabet. He read elementary 
Sanskrit and vernacular with another teacher 
named Sudarsana and completed his education 
in the tol of Pandit Grangadas^ a very learned 
professor.^ "We learn from a song by Narahari 
who knew Mmai from his childhood, that in this 
iol he not only obtained a thorough mastery of 
Sanskrit but acquired a respectable knowledge of 
Pali;^ 

His devotion to books was grieat. Says 
'Brindabana Das " he always reads, even when 
' soing to bathe or sleep or to 

In the tol. ,. ,, f , ' 

dine, one would see a book m 
his hands. He writes commentaries on grammar 
himself. What he reads he so thoroughly 
masters that no one can hold his own when 
arguing with him. He beats his opponent 
and establishes a logical proposition with great 
cleverness, and then, to the wonder of his fellow- 
Jstudents, upsets it himself and establishes the 
quite opposite theory formerly held by his rival." 
But though he grew to be such a fine scholar, 



• Jayananda's Chaitanya Mangala 
= Gaura Pada Tarangini, 



15 



114 CHAITANYA AND UIS AGE 

his boyish excesses and faults did not cease. 
What could be more appalling to a veteran pro- 
fessor like Gangadas than the fact that his pupil 
gave the name of Gangadas to a dog and kept 
it constantly with him and called it aloud by 
the name of the professor,^ The young lad 
proudly told the old and respectable scholar and 
physician Murari, that grammar was too compli- 
cated a subject for a physician ; it would be far 
better if that scholar would mind his herbs and 
.plants and never trouble himself with Sanskrit 
grammar,^ He mimiced and ridiculed the people 
of Sylbet who resided then at Nadia, without 
waiting to listen to their just allegation that his 
own father and mother had been born in Sylhet 
and that it was extremely ridiculous on his 
part to be peacocked up as a coqney and to 
mock at the people of his own native place 
where the family had lived for generations, 
Nimai, however, would not wait to argue with 
them but continue his mimicing so that 
some of them came forward to assault him 
with sticks, but the lad took to his heels 
and could not be overtaken ; so some of them 
ran to the Kazi to lodge a complaint. Old 
scholars of good repute would shun the path if 
theysaw Niraai coming, for they were afraid of 
an encounter with him and of the wild pranks 

■• Chaitanya Mangala by Jayananda. 
» Chaitanya Bhagavata, A-di- 



•the pranks lis 

and jests which the young scholar was sure to 
fling at them as a sequel to his triumph after a 
debate. He had even the audacity of finding 
fault with a verse of Isvara Puri, the great 
apostle and saint, and had once said point blank 
that there were grammatical mistakes in his 
exposition of the holy texts. 

His -nature, wild in excessive energy, but 
transparent and pure as ice, had some restraint. 
Chaitanya Bhagavata says what is repeated in 
all biographies, — he did not even do so much as 
glance at any woman ; if he happened to 
meet one of them in the way he would turn aside 
and avoid her. He had teased the little girls 
when only five years old, but when he came of 
age he scrupulously avoided all contact with 
women. 

While Nimai was still studying in the tol of 
Gangadas, Jagannatha Misra died. It is related 
in the Chaitanya Mangala by Jayananda that 
Chaitanya was engaged in copying a text at the 
house of Gangadas when Haridas reported to him 
that his father was dying. Shortly after he 
completed his education and was given the title 
of 'Vidyasagara' — the ocean of learning. So great 
was his reputation for scholarship that at 
that tender age when he had just passed his 
teens he established a iol and began to teach 
higher subjects to his students. 



lie CHAtTANYA AND HIS ACJii 



The founding of a Tol. 

This tol was founded by the munificencie 
of Mukunda Sanjaya at Vidyanagar, one 
of the wards of Nadia. Chaitanya Bhagavata 
says that Nimai Pandit himself took the 
charge of the education of Mukunda San jay's son 
Basudeva. His nature was 



• A Bneerer of re- g^JJl fyjl ^f boyish frivolitleS. 

We find him still matching 
his lance with Murari Gupta whom he found a 
quite formidable opponent in learned discussions;. 
'None could defeat the other, and this was no 
small compliment to the young pandit, for 
'Murari was an acknowledged scholai", advanced 
in years and commanded great respect. Some- 
times we find Nimai Pandit trying to draw out 
rMukunda, another fine scholar and singer, 
from his study and hold discussions with him. 
But Mukunda always tried to avoid Nimai for 
he dreaded the sceptical views of the young 
, scholar. Nimai did not like his conduct at all, 
and one day told Govinda Ghosh " What does 
^Mukunda find in these Vaishnava scriptures that 
he so diligently studies them ? He does not care 
to master the science of grammar as I do." 
Isvara Pari, the great Yaishnava apostle, al- 
ready mentioned by me, paid a visit to Nadia 
about this time. He stayed for a few months in 
the house of Gopinath A chary ya and people 



THE PRANKS 117 

assembled in crowds to see the holy man. 
Mukunda frequently called there and sang songs 
on Krishna. " A s soon as Mukunda's sweet voice, 
trembling in emotion, was heard Isvara Puri 
lost all control over himself and passed into a 
trance " for he was a mystic and had God-vision, 
Nimai, from whom love for God was yet far 
away, strayed about Gopinatha's house, unable to 
leave the spot for some strange fascination, yet 
in his pride thinking himself to be superior to 
these men because of his learning. Among those 
men who had gathered round Isvara Puri and 
held him in great admiration was Gadadhara, who 
though a good scholar, cared more for religion 
than grammar or logic. This young scholar, 
target-like, frequently bore Nimai's attacks, for 
the latter often overwhelmed him with many 
naughty problems of logic, demanding solutions 
of them on the spot. "With an eye of jealousy 
did Nimai Pandit see that both Gadadhara and 
Mukunda had grown to be favourites of Isvara 
Puri. This was but quite natural, but for some 
reason or other Nimai did not like the situation. 
He also called on Isvara Puri now and then 
but that was more for the purpose of convincing 
him of his superiority as a scholar than for 
any other, and when Isvara Puri was one 
day, reading out to Gadadhara, his enthusiastic 
listener, a portion of his own Sanskrit work 
Krishna Lilamrita, Nimai arrogantly inter- 



lig ciiAITANtA AND HIS AGti 

rupted and said " the verb you use, Sir, is not 
atmanepadi."^ 

The people of Nadia delighted in the scholar- 
ship of young Nimai who was handsome in ap- 
pearance and possessed of bright intelligence ; 
but said some " God has given this lad attractive 
looks about and great scholarship but what is the 
use of all these as he is irreligious ?" One day 
we findMukunda arguing with him in grammar, 
rhetoric and other subjects and expressing 
wonder at the all-round scholarship of our young 
prodigy. Brindavana Das follows the lines 
of the Bhagavata eulogising Krishna, and says 
in a glowing language " Scholars see him as a 
second Brihaspati, the heavenly sage j women 
would fain have him for their lover and Yogis 
see in his person the signs that would mark him 
out in future as the emancipated one. '' 

It appears that he wrote a commentary , on 

grammar when he was reading in the tol of 

Gangadas. There is a reference to it in many of 

his biographies. When he had 

gra'lZrrtnatgic. "'^ V^^^ ^ ^^^^^ *" ^astcm Bengal 
he found students reading his 
commentary, which was called 'Vidyasagara' after 
his own title. An incident is narrated in the 
Advaita Prakasa, the truth of which I cannot 
avow, that as a student he had written a logical 



1 Chaitanya Bhagabhata, Adi. 



THE PRANKS 119 

treatise and had kept it privately with him. One 
of his fellow students once said to him that he 
also had written a book on logic. Both showed 
their works to each other while crossing the 
Ganges in a ferry boat. So greatly was that 
young man struck with the superiority of Nimai's 
work that he said with a sad look to Niraai " It 
was my dream, my friend, that I would shine 
in this branch of learning, but with such a 
powerful rival as yourself it seems to be a mere 
dream which I cannot think of realising." 
Nimai said " Take heart, my boy, I shall never 
be your rival in the field of logic." Saying so 
he threw away his own book into the Ganges. 
If this account is true, it shows that with all his 
fondness for display of learning and desire to 
defeat scholars in polemics, he had a deeper 
nature inspired by self-sacrifice which lay at 
that time hidden from people on account of 
his boyish frivolities. 

The defeat of the Scholar'' Kesava Kasmiri, 

An event happened about this time which made 

young Js'imai one of the most prominent men 

of Nadia. A great scholar named Kesava 

Kasmiri came to Navadvip 

The invincible Kes- knowing that it was one of the 

ava Kasmiri. " 

principal centres of learning in 
India. Chaitanya Bhagavata says that this man 
had vanquished all scholars of the different 



1£0 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

^^dian schools of learning, such as, Tibet, Delhi, 
Beaares, Guzrat, Kanchi, Telegu countries and 
Parbhanga. He had with him a large number 
of letters in which the pandits of these various 
centres had acknowledged his superiority as a 
scholar. He was dressed like a prince and came 
riding on an elephant with a large number of 
attendants. The veterans of Nadia pointed out 
to Nimai ts the fit person to discuss leiamed 
subjects. Eor this young lad had achieved a 
notoriety by challenging every one to a free 
debate and prided in his talents and power of 
conducting a controversy. 

Nimai received the great scholar with cour- 
tesy. The latter, however, held the youth in 
little regard as he was so young and taken to be 
a mere smatterer in grammar.. Nimai asked 
the proud scholar to compose some extempore 
verses in praise of the Ganges on the banks of 
which they had been seated. Says Brindavana 
Das " As if a hundred clouds roared together, 
the cadence and grand music of the extempore 
verses filled every one with adniiration — nay 
awe. Even Nimai's students were struck by the 
superior merit of the verses." The scholar said 
to Nimai Pandit, " You have only an elementary 
knowledge of grammar. How can it be expected 
that you will appreciate my verses in which 
there are so many excellent examples of figures 
of Poetics, of which you know so little?" Nimai; 



iBADiSINGiiA 12i 

however, dissected the poem as a doctor does a 

corpse and showed that each line of the poem had 

at least one error from the standpoint of Poetics. 

. ^ . „ , In the first line was the word 

iiion oi debate.' 

^%5^_^ spotted with the fault 
called Biruddhamatl. The next line furnished 
an instance of the fault Kran abhanga in the 
word f^\»^ and in the word ^==T^ the fault 
Punuruktabadabhasa and so forth. The great 
scholar could not hold his own and, having been 
thoroughly humiliated, fled away. 

The scholars of Nadia all assembled and 
gave Nimai the title of 'Badisingha' or 'the 
lion of debate' on this occasion. It is said 
that people held him with so much regard that 
even millionaires as they passed by . him in 
palankins, would stop and bow to him and 
then resume their Journey. Some referred to 
the old pi'ophecy that, a Brahmin of Nadia 
would be the king of Bengal " Who knows, 
he might be the same man ?" Others said very 
justly, " We never saw a man so brilliant as 
Nimai Pandit." 



16 



CHAPTEil V 

MAKRiA-GiE — Tour in EiLSXEBN Bengal — Visit 
TO Gaya, Return to Home. Trances— 

CLOSING of the Tol, SaNKIRTAN PARTIES — 

Reformation of Jagai and Madhai 

Marriage. 

Just before founding a tol of his own Nimai 
had married Laksmi, the beautiful daughter 
oE Ballavacharyya of Nadia. Curiously Dr. 
MacNichol in his book on Indian Theism mis- 
takes this man for the leader of the Ballavi sect 
Avho bore the same name. No Indian scholar 
would make such a mistake. Ballavacharya of 
Nadia — Nimai's father-in-law, and Ballava- 
charyya of Brindavana — the founder of the line 
of the Gokul Gosains were altogether two 
different persons. The marriage of Nimai with 
Laksmi, according to all accounts, took place by 
mutual selection. Nimai and Laksmi had often 
seen each other on the banks of the Ganges and 

conceived a liking mutually. 
Lak^f " '°" "'''' Banamali Acharyya, a match- 

maker, was appointed by Ballava 
to negotiate the mairri^ge. But Sachi Devi rejected 



BA.NAMALI— THE MATCH-MAKER 123 

the proposal at once. She said to Banamali, 
" He is yet a boy and Has not completed his 
education. He is, besides, t'athei'less. This is not 
at all the time for oui' thinking of his marriage. 
Help him by all means to complete his educa- 
tion." Dejected at this refusal Banamali was 
plodding his way homewards in slow steps when 
Nimai met him and heard the result of his 
interview with Sachi Devi. Nimai coming home 
said to her " What have you spoken to the 
Brahmin Banamali that he is so sad ? Why did 
you not speak to him sweet words that would 
make him happy?' 

The mother took the hint and understood 
that Nimai was willing to- marry. She imme- 
diately sent for Banamali Acharyya and assented 
to the proposal. Ballavacharyya Avas a poor man 
and could not offer him a dowry. But the bride 
was fair and accomplished and the nuptial 
relation was based on mutual choice So they 
were happy. Owing to the reputation that 
Nimai had already established as a scholar at 
Nadia his earnings were now considerable, aud 
according to all accounts he lived in moderate 

affluence. Govinda refers to the 
haJplirSd.^' '"' fi^e beautiful and spacious huts 

that he had built on the banks 
of the Ganges. Like the Brahmin yoiiths of 
well-to-do circumstances, Nimai used to wear the 
Krishnakeli cloth with fine black borders. He 



134 CHAITA-NTA AND HIS AGE. 

.wore golden rings on his ears. His memoirs 
praise the beauty of his long curling hair scented 
Avith oil and washed Avith amlak't. A golden 
locket- tied to a string of the same metal hanged 
on his breast and it was usual in that age to 
wear floral wreaths. This is his portrait as a 
professor of Nadia and the Nadia potters still 
make clay images of their beloved Nimai Pandit 
as such. They would never recognise him as a 
monk and ascetic that afterwards he became, 
implying his severance of all connections with 

'■ Nadia. 

Tour in Eastern Bengal. 

As a Vaishnava he would never touch fish or 
meat. At his home excellent vegetable and 
railk-preparations were made by his mother. 
Govinda Karmakar gives us a menu of the daily 
food prepared by her, amongst M'hich the 
mocharghanta and sukta, besides various pre- 
parations of milk, are emphasized as relished 
most. The beta sak often occurs in the descrip- 
tion as inviting appetite by its sweet smell. 

At the age of 21 Nimai pa=d a visit to Eastern 
Bengal. The object of the trip was to earn 
money, as the villages in those 
BeiTgTi. '° *^*^™ days visited by distinguished 
Brahmin professors used" to 
contribute lump sums as honorarium to them. 
Chaitanya Bhagavata says that he visited various 



DHAKA DAKSHIN AND OTHER PLACES 125 

tols on the banks of the Padma, where he found 
students reading his commentary- on Sanskrit 
Grammar. Lochan Das errs in the chronology 
of events and says that Nimai had converted 
hundreds of men to Vaishnava faith durint; his 
tour in Eastern Bengal. As yet he was innocent 
of all religious zeal, nay, people at that period of 
his life, regretted his sceptical tendencies. 
Jayananda in his memoir says that when 
Nimai visited Eastern Bengal there was a 
considerable number of Brnhma-Kshatriyas 
there. Who were these Brahma-Ksatriyas ? 
Were they of the caste of the Sen kings of 
Bengal? 

Nimai's tour in Eastern Bengal according to 
Nityananda extended up to Assam but the last 
two and a half cantos of that author's metrical 
history Avhicli contain the account, are held as 
unreliable. The point, however, has not been 
finally decided. In this book we find Nimai 
visiting the villages of Nurpur, Subarnagram, 
Betal and Vittidia, The last named villasje was, 
it is said, a great centre of Sanskrit learning; and 
Nimai met there Loknath Lahiri whose mother, 
a daughter of Jayarama Chakrabarti hailed from 
Nadia. Loknatba's step-brother Purusottama took 
sanyasa and was known as Svarup Damodara — a 
name well-known in Vaishnava history. From 
Vitadia he came to his an cestr^r place Dhaka 
Dakshin in Sylhet, where his uncle and even his 



126 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

grand- father Upendra Misra, according to the 
account, still lived. It is said that here he made a 
fair copy of Markandeya Chandi for the use of his 
grand-father. For further details of these tour I 
refer my readers to pp. 225-26 of my Chaitanya 
and His Companions. The tradition current in 
the district of Faridpur is that Nimai Pandit 
visited the village of Kotalipar at this time. 
This village, as every one knows, is even now a 
seat of large Brahmin population. The authen- 
ticity of these pieces of information are called 
, in question on the ground that it should be 
nobody's care to keep notes of his tour at that 
time, when Nimai had not achieved distinction 
as a religious leader. All that has been said 
with regard to this tour by subsequent writers is 
based on vague memcries and traditions, and it is 
not improbable that some villages put in their 
names, without any suflBcient ground, simply to 
heighten their importance; just as we find 
in the case of the Kirnahar people who have 
tried to associate their place with certain 
incidents of Chandi Das's life. 

When taking leave of home, Nimai is said 
to have made over his sacred thread to his wife 
Laksmi to be preserved as a token. The wife 
had behaved exceedingly well as we find in 
Murari's Chaitanya Oharitam, and Sachi Devi 
was well pleased with her. But the young wife 
was not destined to live long. She was beaten 



LAKSMI'S DEATH 127 

on a toe of her right foot by a snake and died 
within a few hours, though all ^he OJhas of 
the locality expert in curing snake bites, had 
been called to her aid. Before her death, the. 

sacred thread of Nimai was 
snake-bite. ^'^* °^ P^t ou her breast at her wish. 

Jayananda says that Laksmi, , 
herself a good painter, had drawn a picture of 
Nimai on a canvas framed with Mood. With 
her eyes fixed on this picture and regretting the 
absence of her husband -from home to her 
friend Chitralata she breathed her last. Nimai 
was just on his way back when this event 
happened. 

Seturn to home. 

He returned with considerable money which 
was the honorarium he had received, and was 
in a jovial spirit. He met Gadadhara and others 
when he was coming home, and mimicked to 
them the accents of East Bengal men. But at 
his house he found his mother weeping. He 
could immediately feel that there had been 
something wrong with his wife. He showed a 
remarkable calmness and advised his mother 
not to regret that which could not be retrieved. 
But from that time forward none saw him 
indulging in those frivolities which had been his 
wont. His deeper nature w^as roused presaging 
the advent of the most memorable epoch of his 
life. 



128 CHAITANYA ATSTD HIS AGE 

Nimai sought his mother's permission to go 
to Gaya for visiting the shrine. He said that 
for the good of the spirit of his father, pinda 
offerings should be made to the lotus , feet of 
Visnu at the place. But his mother before 
granting the permission got him married again 
to Bisnupriya, a daughter of the famous Pandit 
Sanatana of Nadia. Nimai was not at all willing 
to marry. It appears that 

Nimai at first rejects •,■< , •/• j! U" j. 

the proposal of inar- without waitmg for h]s assent 
war^""^ ^''^-"'^'"■' Sachi Devi with the help of 
Kasinatha Ghatak, a match- 
maker, had already negotiated the marriage 
and Sanatana was engaged in making pre- 
parations for the ceremony on a large scale, 
aided by his friend Buddhimanta Khan. But 
when the report of the proposed marriage 
reached Nimai's ears he said with vexation 
" what marriage are you speaking of ? 
whose marriage "r I do not knoAV anything." 
The mother was very sorry and sent 
word to Sanataua that all preparations should 
be stopped as her son was not willing. But 
Nimai afterwards repented his conduct, as much 
pain and worry w^ere not only caused to his 
mother, but to Sanatana and his family who had 
already spent much money for preparations. 
Nimai called Kasinatha Ghatak to him and 
said, " Go and tell my mother that I cannot 
go against her wishes. How can I undo what she 



VISIT TO GAYA l29 

has already done?" The marriage was thus 
performed with great eclat. 

Immediately after marriage Nimai Pandit 
started for Gaya with some pious pilgrims hound 
for that shrine. At a place called Mandar he 

got fever and drank water 
Gayi"" '*^'*' ^°' touched by some Brahmin's feet 

which, it is said, cured him of 
his illness. He did not speak much. A turning 
point had come in his life. One given to prolific 
speaking and frivolities had become a good 
quiet boy and his companions were all struck 
by this change. Entering Gaya he sawlshwara 
Puri, that saint and scholar whom he had so 
often ridiculed. He longed for a sight of him. 
Never did Ishwara Puri appear in such a light to 
the young scholar. Chaitanya in great emotion 
held him close to his breast and said " My 
visit to Gaya is a great success. I have seen 
you, Master. You are the holiest of shrines. 
If offering pindas to the spirit of my forefathers 
would save their souls, a mere sight of you 
would do so a hundred titnes more. Gaya 
and all the shrines put together have not that 
sanctity which you have." He trembled in 
great emotion as he said this; for the great 
scholar, the haughty youth of Nadia, did no 
longer exist, and in his place, behold a young 
Brahmin, low and humble, yielding to the emo- 
tions which faith brings in. 
17 



130 CitAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

In the temple he found priests offering 
flowers and scents to the Lotus feet of Vishnu. 
They were singing the praises of the Feet in the 
language of devotion and reverence. Nimai 
heard it recited that from the divine Feet 
fl.owed the Ganges to save humanity from 
sin ; — it was under these Feet that Vali, the king 
proud of his liberality, was humiliated ; — sages 
and Rishis have contemplated the Lotus Feet 
of Vishnu from age to age. The recitation 
of the beautiful Sanskrit slokas gave rise to 
strange emotions in Nimai's mind. He saw, as 
it were, the whole world bending low before the 
Lotus Feet, the emblem of divine power and 
love. He could no longer bear to hear the sweet 
recitation, but wept and fell senseless under the 
spell of an overpowering emotion. 

Trances. 

The companions of Nimai thought that all 
these were but the after-effects of the fever from 
which he had recently recovered. He had grown 
weak and nervous and they tended him with care, 
but when he recovered his senses, he said, " Oh 
Krishna, my father, where art Thou ? I thought 
I had found Thee, but Thou art not now with 
me." Saying this he recited some Sanskrit 
verses and began to cry vehemently. He told 
his fellow-pilgrims to return home. " Think of 
me as one lost. I have no other home than the 



BACK TO NADIA 131 

Brinda-groves. Thither shall I go to seek my 
Krishna." 

As one delirious in high fever he behaved 
all the way back, and it was with great difficulty 
that his companions brought him home. At 
Kutnarhatta he stopped. Ishwara Puri had 
returned to this place, which was his native 
village. Nimai partook of the food, cooked by 
Ishwara Puri, and wept and said that he was 
blessed. When about to leave Kumarhatta he 
took a handful of dust from the ground in 
his hand and tied it with the edge of his dhuti. 
" This dust," he said, " is sacred, because Ishwara 
Puri, the saint, was born here. This dust is 
as dear to me as all my wealth, as my life itself." 
As he said so he wept and fainted again in great 
emotion. 

Nadia had sent the proudest and haughtiest 
of her young scholars as a pilgrim to Gaya. But 
he returned as a mad man, whose handsome figure 
was besmeared with dust and whose eyes stared in 
a strange manner shedding incessant tears. His 
companions came one by one and were dismayed 
to see his condition. To Gadadhara and others 
he said, " Hear my friends, I have seen a sight 
at Gaya-— the most wonderful thing that human 
eyes ever beheld. Stop, I shall tell you 
what I saw." But at this stage he trembled in 
emotion reclining on the arms of Sriman Paiidit 
and fell senseless, shedding tears which would 



182 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

not stop. He could not tell what he had 
seen. His attempts to do so brought on a 
trance. 

Poor Sachi Devi was in great fright. People 
came in crowds to see him and all of them said 
that it was madness ; the physicians prescribed 
sMvadi gJirita and some medicated oil. In order to 
divert his mind Sachi made the beautiful Vishnu- 
priya sit near him, but Nimai did not care to 
glance at his bride. He recited Sanskrit verses 
and always wept occasionally bursting into ex- 
clamations, such as, " Oh Krishna, where art 
thou ? " Lochana Das describes his condition at 
this stage, " One always finds him prostrate on 
the ground, weeping. At noon-day he asks what 
time of night it is. With joined hands he 
bows to some one ; and then recites the name of 
Krishna with tears." Jayananda says " He does 
not wear his usual apparel, nor perfume himself 
with sandal as was his wont. 

Lost to the world. 

The curling hair is all uncared 
for. His golden rings and lockets he has thrown 
away and he walks in slow careless steps 
absorbed in something unknown, when Sachi 
Devi calls him aloud from behind he does not 
pay any heed to her. The costly couch, is there, 
but he sleeps on the bare ground. The evening 
and morning prayers and worship with the 
tuUM leaves he has eschewed, acting as one 
who is lost to this world," 



NEAR THE KVNBA PLANTS 138 

They all discovered symptoms of lunacy in 
Nimai — the physicians and all, especially the 
sympathetic women-folk, who said to Sachi 
" Why do you seem to be yet uncertain about 
his malady ? Know definitely that it is a case of 
lunacy, bind him hand and foot, and keep him 
under proper treatment." But the band of 
Vaishnabs headed by Adwaitaoharya, who often 
met at the house of Sribasa, thought it might be 
something other than lunacy. 
mad man** ^° °^ " ^o 01^6 had yct askcd Nimai 
why he behaved in that way, 
excepting Sriman Pandit, a Vaishnab, who 
having put the question to Nimai, received 
this answer from him " I shall to-morrow pay a 
visit to the house of Suklambar Brahmachari 
and fully state my case to you." 

Next morning in the house of Sribasa all 
Vaishnabs met as usual to pluck flowers for wor- 
ship ; for in that historic courtyard were rows of 
kunda plants which supplied their treasures of 
beautiful white flowers in all seasons. There the 
Vaishnabs, as they gathered flowers in small 
cane-baskets, talked about the condition of 
Nimai. One said " On the barest reference to 
Gaya he bursts into tears and faints. What 
is the reason of this madness, if it be so 
indeed ? " 

Sriman Pandit said, " This evening by the 
wish of Nimai all of us should meet at the house 



134 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

of Suklambara where he has promised to speak 
out his mind." 

Just when this conversation was going on, 
a man came to Sribasa with a message from 
Sachi Devi that she was in great distress as her 
son had gone off his head. Sribasa forthwith 
went to Nimai's house and Sachi began to 
weep bitterly. But Sribasa said " I shall privately 
see Nimai and find out if it is really madness or 
not." And Sribasa entered the room where 
Nimai sat all alone. 

They had a long talk and when Sribasa came 

out from the room, his own 

SffbaBt°rterdicr'^'^' eyes wcrc full of tears. He said 

to Sachi that her son was a god ; 

he had brought such spiritual treasure from 

Gaya that she should thank God for it. 

He returned to his comrades to say that he 
had beheld what he had only read of in the sacred 
Scriptures. Nimai was a second Suka or 
Prahlad. " He has seen the Unseen. He cannot 
for a moment forget what he has seen. It is a 
bliss to behold his great love." 

Sachi had great confidence in Sribasa and 
felt reassured. Medical treatment of her son 
was given up. Nimai in the course of his con- 
versation with Sribasa had said " You have heard 
all ; say if I am mad " to which Sribasa had 
re;plied " If you are mad, we all covet a bit of 
such madness. It will at once sanctify our 



IN THE TOL 135 

lives." And Ohaitauya said " If you too, Sribasa, 
had joined these people and called me mad I 
would have drowned myself in the Ganges." It 
is just the same sort of thing that we read of 
Mahomet. When the prophet related all the 
miracles he had seen to Khadija, and besides 
told her that people called him mad, she said " I 
can disbelieve heaven and earth but not you." 
And Mahomet took heart at her words, and she 
became the first of his disciples. 

The closing of the tol. 

It was in a place called Kanaier Natsala 
that the first vision of God had first dawned on 
his soul. " Some one plays on the flute calling 
me. It is the most wonderful thing I have ever 
seen " — said he to the Vaishnabs. But he had 
to attend his tol. During the period of his 
Tsbsence from Nadia his pupils would not read 
with any other professor. In the court-yard 
attached to the temple of Mulcunda Sanjoy, 
the tol sat as usual. The professor came, but 
when he was teaching grammar, 

How the professor n , 7 7 - ■ x 1 • 

did his dnty of teaoh- hC SpOKO 01 Ohalctl. In explam- 

""^ ing the derivation of words, 

he said that the universe was derived from God. 
The students laughed and said that all this was 
due to something wrong in the head of the 
pandit. They applied to Gangadas I'andit who 
was Nimai's tutor, and told him that they were 



136 CHAITANtA AND HIS AGE 

in great distress as their professor would not 
teach them any science but continually discoursed 
on spiritual devotion. The old teacher called on 
Nimai and reprimanded him saying " Why should 
you give up teaching your students ? Your 
father Jagannatha Misra was a great scholar 
and your grand-father Mlambar was also reputed 
for learning. They were both pious men. Both 
on your father's side and mother's side there is 
no one who did not attain high reputation as a 
scholar. Do you want* to say, Nimai, that purity 
of soul and devotion are not compatible with 
study ? How, then, were your father and grand- 
father pious and learned at the same time ? You 
are yourself a great scholar. Why should you 
behave in this way ? " Nimai told him that from 
that day he would pay attention to his work and 
that his old professor would no more have any 
occasion to find fault with him. The next day 
he attends tol and goes on vigorously with giving 
notes on grammar till evening. But he suddenly 
hears Ratnagarbha, a friend of his father, reciting 
some sloTcas from the Bhagavata and he loses all 
control over himself, and weeping, passes into a 
trance. Coming to his senses he runs to meet 
Ratnagarbha and says " What you have recited, is 
so sweet, say it again." And then he passes again 
into a trance and mistakes all objects of senses 
for his Krishna. Thus his proper professional 
work as professor was continually interrupted. 



HIS ADDRESS TO THE STUDENTS 137 

" Krishna is my father and mother ; and all of 
you, I pray on my knees, sing his praises." 
Saying so he fervently speaks on God's love and 
discourses on spiritual philosophy. But he was 
a teacher of grammar and rhetoric. However 
highly the students appreciated his devotional 
fervour they justly remarked that it was not 
that which they wanted to hear from their 
professor at school. " All that you say. Pandit, 
is very right, hut what about our text-books " — 
they said. Still for 10 days more he continued 
his lectures. They looked with wonder on his 
fervent faith ; they were charmed by his most 
engaging trances. It seemed to them as if a 
Suka- or Prahlad, a Narada or Vyas had 
assumed mortal shape again to redeem fallen 
humanity by teaching devotion to God. But 
they were justified in complaining that they 
had made no progress whatever in their studies 
all these 10 days. Then came a confession from 
the professor, which was plain enough. I quote 
the following from the Ohaitanya Bhagavata. 
" He was pleased with what the students said 
and addressed them thus: — 

He closes the tol. „ ^^^^ ^^^ ^^^ j^ ^^^^ CnOUgh. 

My own sentiments are such that I cannot 
speak of them everywhere. I am persuaded by 
a vision from which I cannot escape. All 
sounds bear a message of Krishna to me. All 
space to me looks like His abode. My prayer to 
18 



U8 CHAITANYA AKD His AGE 

you to-day is that I have no further lessons to 
give to you. I give you permission whole- 
heartedly ; go wherever you like and read with 
some other professor. For myself I cannot 
speak of anything which is not connected with 
Krishna. What I say is true and you may rely 
on me." Saying so with tearful eyes he closed 
the book that was in his hand. Then he blessed 
them saying, " If for even a day I have believed 
in Krishna and done any act worthy of His 
servant, I pray to Him that you may prosper." ^ 

The Sanhirtan parties. 

Nimai thus formally closed his school and 
formed a band of Vaishnabs with Narahari, 

Jl^SJ ^7{ ctC<t1 Cttf^CIf^ 5rf5[ II 

"sitsf \\v?) <5rt^ tti srtft'F 'srfsit^r ii 

#N ^1^ t? 'srtfsi f^srfsf ^^ II 
^5^ ft? '^srt^ ^^ ^1 "^c^ ^srfsft^r i 
jp5j "sftlir ^%itst fl'i '«itl5rf?r ii 
4^ c^t^ sif H^ T»tc^ ^%1 1 

^51:^ ftf ^ cstsrt T^m '^^^ II " 

Ch. Bha. 



SPIRITUAL DEVOTION AND HUMILITY 139 

Gadadhar and Sribasa, who all danced together 
and sang the following couplet : — 

^ffRt^ ItfTfl C^^ ^l I " 

The couplet is nothing but a repetition of 
the idea " I bow to thee, Oh Krishna " composed 
in two lines in which the various names of 
Krishna are used to heighten the devotionial 
sentiment. They danced in a circle as they 
sang this. Forty years ago, in my old native 
village in the district of Dacca, I first heard 
this couplet sung by a- few young men who 
. acted a drama on Chaitanya's life. I remember 
the impression then made on me by the music 
and dance, and can well imagine why people 
gathered by hundreds at Nadia attracted 
by this Kirtan, Nimai was only 22 years 
old. His great devotional fervour lent a charm 
to the music ; and as the number of his admirers 
increased, they held their performances in the 
spacious courtyard of Sribasa every night. 

Our young hero was a completely changed 
man now. Whomsoever he met, he used to 
address humbly and say " Bless me, my friend, 
for lam badly in need of your blessings. You 
have from my early years tried to impress on me 
the value of faith. I was indeed a poor learner, 
who did not pay any heed to you then." 

To Gadadhara he said " Eortunate are you 
friend, for from your early youth you have been 



UO CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

a devoted servant of God." Then turning to 

others he said " If I serve you, my friends, I find 

devotion for Krishna grow in me " ; saying so he 

carried the basket of some one 

He offers his ser- from the banks of the Ganges 

Tioee to all. , . , • -i j> i • 

to his house mspite ot his 

protest. He sometimes washed the clothes of 

humble bathers to their intense fear, for it was 

considered a sin to accept such menial services 

from a Brahmin. Sometimes Nimai helpe a man 

by carrying a part of his load, and sometimes 

he was found to gather Tcmha grass and dig 

sacred earth from the banks of the Ganges for 

some Brahmin worshippers. Where they tried 

to stop him, he said " Porbear, my friends, 

these little services make my vision of Krishna 

clearer " ' Nimai preached a doctrine of love 

which may be thus put here. 

1. To recite the name of God, considering 
oneself humbler than a straw. 

' " (Totit »!«[ (?^^ CT f^ ^% tt^ I 
iS\% ^f^I ^s^ tt?t «(C^ (Tit ^ II 
^WSH ^ ^tCfl ^ffif^ ToC^i I 
^ ^^ "^fsf ^t^ CfiT® "srtlW II 

^ isfl -^k^ 'Ft^i:^ (?R ^^ I 
Tife ^ c^rf^ f^^ K51 ^t^ ^ir?r II 

mf% ^C^ ^^ ^^ sf^ ;qtt? ^t^ I 

Oh. Bha. 



ANOTHER YOUNG MAN JOINS 141 

2. Without seeking honour for one's own 
self to give it freely to others. 

3. To bear all ills patiently like a tree. 

The tree does not defend itself if one cuts 
it to pieces. It does not seek a drop of water 
from any one though it dries up. It gives 
flowers, fruits and shade even to one who cuts 
it. -This ideal love is of Christ, for did he not 
give love to those who crucified him and was 
not his last word a prayer for their forgiveness ? 

At Sribasa's courtyard the Vaishnabs sang and 
danced with Nimai in their midst ; and songs of 
exquisite poetic beauty were composed by Nara- 
hari, the inspiration coming from Nimai's trances. 

At this time another young man, older than 
Nimai only by eight years, 
paid a visit to Nadia. He 
was Nityananda. He resided at the house of 
Nandanacharya. He wore a blue coloured 
dhuti and a large blue turban. In appearance 
he bore a resemblance to Bishwarup, Nimai's 
elder brother, who had gone away as a sam/asi. 
This made Sachi Devi call him her son. His 
eyes were large and beautiful, and Brindavana 
Das says poetically " Where are the lotuses 
that could be compared to them ? " Nityananda 
as a young sanyasi had travelled over the whole 
of India, visiting all her shrines. He had come 
to Nadia at last in order to meet Nimai. He 
thus explains the object of his visit. 



143 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

" I saw many shrines — in fact all associated 
with Krishna. There are many temples, but I 
did not find Krishna in any of them. I asked 
saints and holy men ' How is it, revered sirs, that 
I see His throne empty — the God I seek I do not 
find anywhere?' One of them advised me to 
return to Bengal saying * In Nadia you will 
find Him. He is there to redeem the fallen.' 
And I have forthwith come here, — for none is 
so sinful and fallen as I am." * 

By this time Haridas, the Mahomedan con- 
vert to Vaishnabism, who, as stated already, had 
suffered all kinds of persecution for his adher- 
ence to Vaishnab faith, came and joined this 
small band of Vaishhabs at Nadia. 



Tt^ srfi^ cfff<t fc^ off^tc^ 5^1 11^ I 
fe®"W ^ff^ ^c^ ^t^ c^it^ ^1 II 

^? «t^ 1^, f^ C^ C^p{ t%« I 

^faRTl ^|5{ ^ ^^ C^t^ III " 

Oh. Bha., p. 181. 



KHISHNA-CULT in bengal 143 

Bengal is dedicated to Krishna- worship in a 

sense in which no other country of India is. 

All other cults here have been 

Bengal a fit soil for • /, ■, , i . /. , i 

the chosen seed. iniluencea and modified by 

Vaishnab faith. The air of this 
province is resonant with the songs of Joydeb, 
Chandidas and Vidyapati, and becomes charged 
with the red powder of fag during Vaishnab 
festivities which lends scarlet charm to the 
blue landscape, forming a favourite theme for the 
descriptive powers of our Vaisnava poets. Love 
for Krishna here is not only in the air, but in the 
gardens and meadows, where the blue-coloured 
flower that blooms the sweetest, is called the 
Krishna pada or the feet of Krishna, and the big 
red flower on the top of largest flower-trees is 
called Krishnd Chura or the crown, of Krishna. 
The cow dust — ' godhuli ' darkens the pastures 
reminding every ruralBengali of Krishna's return 
home with the cows ; and Nanda and Jasoda 
are the typical parents whose names are on the 
lips of every Bengali woman. The temples in the 
evening draw men and women of this pastoral 
country by the sounds of their sweet bells, and 
then through the scented smoke and five lovely 
lights waved by the priests, the images of the 
divine cowherd and his consort, half veiled by 
incense that burns there, and amidst the chanting 
of sacred verses, shine forth as visions seen in a 
dream. 



144 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

In this land where love for Krishna had 
entered deep into the hearts of rural villagers 
inspiring the devotee and the poet — the rich man 
and the peasant alike — inspiration which Nimai's 
love -ecstasies imparted to the people was almost 
overwhelming. Night and day he spoke ,of 
nothing else than Krishna ; he fasted and wept 
like a maiden in love and yielded himself 
constantly to recitation and singing of Krishna's 
name. His pride was gone, he took no care of 
his dress or of personal comforts, and his scholar- 
ship was considered by him as mere vanity. 
He had so thoroughly identified himself with 
all that belonged to Krishna, that it was no won- 
der that the people soon identified him with 
Krishna Himself and called him an avatara. 

The courtyard of Sribasa, where these Scmkir- 

tan performances were held, was accessible to 

only a limited number of de- 

The Kirtan party. , i jii j.ij. ii i 

^ votees headed by that old and 

veteran scholar — ^^Adwaitacharyya. Nityanada was 
of course there. Gadadhar and Narahari waved 
Chamara, when Nimai danced and sang ; 
Bakreswara was nearly as handsome as Nimai 
and excelled in dancing ; there were his old 
teacher Gangadas, Govinda Ghosh, Vasudeb, 
Murari Gupta, Haridas and others who sang in 
chorus. The Chaitanya Bhagavata gives names 
of nearly 40 men who formed this blessed party 
and who met every night in Sribasa's courtyard 



THE MANOHARSAT KIRTAN 145 

and occasionally only in that of Chandrasekhar — 
a Vaidya by caste. 

The Kirtan music was heard from outside ; 
but the non-believers had no entry. The music 
was grand. The lays of Jaydev, Chandidas, 
Vidyapati and of Narahari had hitherto been 
sung in the difEerent modes of the Hindu musi- 
cal system. But it appears that Nimai gave a 
new turn to their singing. He resuscitated the 
pastoral tune of boatmen's songs adding to it a 
lovely musical mode which was quite original ; 
it sprang from his intense and fervid emotion. 
This was the origin of the famous Manoharshai. 
It was invented in a rude form by some people 
of the pargana of the same name in the Burdwan 
district of Bengal. But its power to create 
pathos was no doubt accentuated marvellously 
by Nimai's devotional spirit. The Manoharshai 
became a powerful instrument in the hands of 
the Vaishnabs and it is now unrivalled in produc- 
ing an effect so far as tender emotions are con- 
cerned ; it is for this reason that when Pratap 
Rudra, the King of Orissa, charmed with Kirtana 
had asked Gopinath Acharyya. as to who ori- 
ginated it, remarking that he had never heard 
a music so sweet, Gopinath said that it was 
Chaitanya who created by his intense fervour, 
the pathos of that musical mode. In the temple 
of Puri the songs of Jaydev were constantly 
sung in Gurjari and other modes. But since 
19 



146 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

Chaitanya's time these songs have been sung in 
the Manoharshai, which should not be taken as 
a gift from the musicians but from the Vaishnab- 
devotees and which have given a novel interest 
to the songs of Jaydev, Chandidas and others. 
If a material comparison is not considered as 
beyond the mark I may say that in subtlety and 
finenesss of its tunes it resembles the fine weav- 
ing of the Daicoa, muslin, and in the spiritual 
world there is no force comparable to this in its 
power to appeal to the emotional side of our 
nature. The Kirtan thus introduced by Nimai 
Pandit, was developed by the Vaishnabas and 
classified into three different styles, — the Mano- 
harshai, the Garanhati and the Reneti. 

The Vaishnabs gradually became a power in 
Nadia. But howsoever the layman appreciated 
and enjoyed the emotional felicities afforded by 
the creed, the scholarly people there became 
hostile to it. They proudly asked as to where 
could be the text in the scriptures which justifies 
such dancing and this play of 
emotion. One should silently 
offer his prayers to God. Where was it ever heard 
that people in the name of religion should create 
such an uproar and disturb others' sleep ? As no 
outsider was allowed 'access, various rumours 
were spread about the party. One of these 
was that Sribasa being a wealthy man served 
these people with rich meals every night, hence 



SRIDHARA— THE FAITHFUL 147 

they attended the meetings so eagerly. Sridhara, 
the faithful, who was a very poor man had been 
advised by Nimai Pandit to give up his devotion 
to Krishna and worship other gods and goddesses 
that would fetch him money. This of course 
Nimai had done when bhakti had not yet dawned 
on his soul. But on all such occasions Sridhara 's 
reply was " Well hast thou said. Oh Brahmin lad, 
yet time passes and at the end makes no difEerence. 
The king in his golden hall partakes of rich meals 
and behold the birds that live on the boughs of 
trees. When death comes it levels all. Each 
has his lot apportioned by God." Sridhara now 
attended these meetings very punctually, and 
besides sang Krishna's name aloud in the 
streets. The hostile party reviled him saying 
" This mean fellow is not worth a kowri but wants 
to figure as a big devotee ; he is half -famished 
hence he cries aloud in the streets to suppress 
the pangs of hunger.'" One of these scholars 

<S(^'^ 1^^ 1^^ ^t^ 1t5 II 
.^ faJ ^#J ^ ^»t^ C^'F (M^ I 

<il~«^ ICSf ^tW C^^ t^ f5« II " 



148 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

saySj *' Think of the matter seriously, what mis- ; 
chief may not ere long be forthcoming. This , 
uproar and disturbance of sleep and rest of honest 
people will not long remain unnoticed, and the ■. 
Emperor of Gour may any moment send an army 
to stop all these, and the result will be that 
honest people will share the fate of these wicked 
men." Another man said "The great scholar 
Nimai is now a totally ruined man. He had fine 
talents but he has altogether given up his studies. 
If one does not read grammar for a month, he 
forgets its rules, it is a complicated science.'"; 
One says "At night these people bring five fairies 
by witchcraft and incantations," to which another 

•^^ *tft?r srfc^ 'srfci ^'^^ i 

^m »f5 C^fs (M ^^ ^ ^ II 

^rc^5^ tt^ cTtw ^s(c^ ^i:^ I 
^t^ fel srti Tt^ ^^ ^<^(^ II 
si3?1 fW c^ 'stc's ct^ srr^ ^^ 1 
^«rf^ ^^ ^ ^tlw ^R sic^ II " 

Chaitanya Bhag, p. 224* 
Chaitanya Bhag. p. 214 



THE HOSTILITY OF THE SCHOLARS 149 

added " They have learned black art from Madhu- 
mukhi — a fairy." Others ascribed the famine 
that threatened the locality then to the anger of 
God who, it was alleged, was provoked by the 
great uproar and dance of these false people. 

The hostility of the scholars and other people, 
did not stop here. They applied to the Kazi 
complaining of the great uproar which caused 
disturbances of sleep, and asking him to stop it 
at once in the interest of public peace. The 
Kazi whose name, I believe, was Gorai, ordered 

C^ ^^I <£iWm- ttf«( ft® tT^ I 

w:^ c^ #ta iff ^ot^ sfs/ ^t?( II 

Chaitanya ^hag., p. 319. 

The view they took of the Vaishnab soags was full of aorimoniouB 
attack and ill-disgaised malice. 

vot^ ^ OTf<fW ^ fiJSf 5H «(rt^ II 

5t^^5ii ^ jff^f '£i^^ ^%rl I , 
5ftf% ^n ^f^ «rt?( ^^^ f ^^1 II 
if?r^.^ 'srtfJf JTC5 OTf«Rt?T "s:^ i 

CVff«t G^ tt'5t^'«f«T C^Jl,^'^ ^C^ 11 

■st^rt^f^i ^1% ^^ ^%l t?^ II 
^i «ff?r ^u itir c^l ^f^ <M^ I 

Oh. Bha. 



150 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

that no man should be allowed thenceforth to 

sing the name of God in the public streets. 

Kirtana was thus stopped by the hand of the law. 

But when Nimai heard of this order, he 

showed a bold front; he said 

Nimai's defiant ^^at the wholc air of Nadia 

attitude. 

must ring with kirtcma songs 
in the evening. Formerly Haridas and Nitya- 
nauda and some other Yaishnabs used to sing in 
the public streets in small bands. Their main 
dance and music had hitherto been confined to the 
courtyards of the houses of Sribasa and Ohandra- 
sekhar. But on that memorable night Nimai 
ordered that all of them would come out and 
hold their performance together in the public 
streets and make their round through the whole 
city. Great preparations were made, though it 
had been known to all that in the night previous 
some police officers had assaulted Sridhara and 
broken his tabor, while singing in the public 
street. 

That day the great love in which young 

Nimai was held by the people 
The great love of was striMugly in cvideuce. The 

people for Nimai. o •/ ^ ^ ^ 

people had all along been 
sorry that they had no access into Sribasa's house 
to see the kirtana performance. When it was 
announced that Nimai with his whole party would 
come out in the public streets in the even- 
ing, every house was illuminated, picttiresque 



A DEFIANT ATTITUDE 151 

banners were waved aloft from the top of every 
house, and men and women dressed in fine ap- 
parel waited with anxious eyes to see the grand 
procession coming. It showed that though the 
hostile party was all along active and inveterately 
set against Nimai, their number was insignificant. 
The whole of Nadia was astir with love and 
curiosity to have a sight of the young Pandit 
who, it was believed, had brought a message for 
them from Heaven. 

The procession was divided into four groups, 
f The first was led by Adwaita- 

The great prooesBion. , ii i i u j.i 

charya ; the leader of the 
second party was Haridas ; the third was led by 
Sribasa and the fourth by Nimai himself accom- 
panied by Nityananda. Each party consisted of 
a large number of Vaishnab musicians and 
dancers. Some people carried jars full of scented 
oil to help the lighting of hundreds of torches by 
which the whole city became ablaze. Nimai had 
frequent trances often falling senseless on the 
ground. And when he recovered he asked every- 
one with a piteous look " Oh where is my Krishna 
gone ?" He wept and behaved as one separated 
from his love. The people were moved to tears 
as they saw his appealing looks and his love- 
ecstasies. The Chaitanya Bhagavata records that 
so intense was the effect, that thieves and pilferers 
who had planned to carry on thefts that night, 
availing themselves of the general carelessness 



152 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

that prevailed in the city, forgot their object as 
they saw Nimai crying for God, like a young 
woman for her lover, Balarama Das, the poet, 
says that wherever Nimai went dancing in the 
midst of the procession there hundreds of lights 
were brought forward by people anxious to catch 
a glimpse of his face.' 

Hiis immense crowd that gathered and 
passed through the streets with torches mak- 
ing the night bright as day, — the deafening 
sound of tabor and the shrill clang of cymbals 
and mandira could not remain unnoticed by the 
Kazi. The procession passed through Gadi- 
gaccha, Pardanga and other wards of Nadia. 
The Kazi probably felt that it would be impos- 
sible to stop the enthusiastic 

The Kazi welccnes ^^^^^ g^ j,^^ ^^^^^ ^ 

Nimai. 

constables to learn all particu- 
lars. One old man amongst them returned ■ 
with the message that as he had been coming 
up to prevent the crowd, lightning fell close 

^ " sitter® ^rtfk^ ctW c^ fwr^ ^ i 
^r^ 5CT ftf w:^ c^ ^ 'ft^ ii 

ci2t^ s?ft ?c^ JHt^ 5?^t5i^ m:^ II 

Gour Pada Tarangini, p. 249. 



JAGAI AND MADHAl 153 

to him and singed his white beard — that was 
surely a sign of divine wrath. The fact seems 
to be that the defiant attitude of the crowd 
overawed the Kazi's constables and they were 
not prepared to meet the situation. It is 
further on record that the Kazi's admira- 
tion was roused by the enthusiasm of the people. 
After all they bad been singing God's name 
and were harmless. Nimai with his party 
passed by his very gate and some of the crowd 
pelted his house with stones. But he did not take 
any serious notice of it. The sight of Nimai had 
filled his mind, as it happened in hundreds of 
other cases, with admiring love. So young bright 
and handsome — he had foregone all the pleasures 
of the world and was so devoted to One for whose 
interceding love and grace there is need in every 
heart. The Kazi came down from his house and 
said to Nimai sweet words apologizing for his 
order and adding " You do not know how dear 
you are to me, lad, your father and grand-father 
were my close friends. Happy am I to see you 
to-day, so devoted to Allah." 

Reformation of Jagm cmd Madhcd. 

Then comes the episode of reformation of 

Jagai and Madhai, two notor- 

jagai and Madhai. ious rufi&aus of Nadia. They 

were grandsons of Subhananda 

Roy. This man had two sons Raghunath and 

20 



154 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

Janardan. Jagai or Jagannath was a son of 
Raghunath and Madhai or Madhaba of Janardan. 
They belonged to an aristocratic Brahmin family 
of Nadia and were very powerful. Jagai and 
Madhai were dead drunkards. Though Brahmins 
they ate beef, burnt houses and took away women 
-by force. Jayananda says that they not only 
took beef but also ham. These two ruffians re- 
solved to assault Nimai Pandit and his followers 
for singing kirtcm songs in the streets. Accord- 
ingly when Nityananda was singing Krishna's 
name one day, Madhai flung a broken bottle at 
him ^which cut his forehead and it bled profusely. 
Nityananda took no offence and blessed 
-him, and when Nimai came and saw the condi- 
tion of his friend, he simply said " Madhai, if it 
was in your mind to strike one of us, why did 
you not strike me ? " Saying this he silently 
took Nityananda with him and the crowd follow- 
ed them in deep but silent sorrow. 

Jagai and Madhai stood wonder-struck. They 
had reviled and assaulted these pious men and 
one of them was badly hurt. Yet not a word of 
anger came from them but they blessed them 
instead. They could not sleep in the night and 
in the morning they paid a visit to the saintly 
men and repented. One of the songs current in 
• the country-side attributed this speech to Jagai 
"Oh Madhai, go and see what sweet sound is 
.there on the banks of the Ganges ! Fo^^lerly 



MADHAI'S REMORSE 155 

the sound of Kirtana pained my ears, to-day it 
soothes my soul," 

Jagai and Madhai thenceforth became totally 
changed men. Madhai though assured over again 
by the saint, whom he had hurt, tliat his sin 
was pardoned, could not find any rest for his soul, 
and one day said " You sir, you have forgiven me, 
but in a drunken state I assaulted many men and 
the thought of this weighs heavily on my mind. 
How can I find rest until I have made adequate 
atonement ? " He was advised to build with his 
own hands a bathing ghat on the banks of the 
Ganges where men and women could gather 
to bathe every day. He built the ghat himself 
with a spade in his hand like a hired labourer 
and he recited the name of God day and night. 
And when people came to bathe there he 
approached each new comer with joined hands 
and said with repentant tears " If, sir, conscious- 
ly or unconsciously I ever gave you any offence, 
be pleased to forgive me. I deeply repent my 
conduct." And many wept to see this humility 
of one who had been a dreaded man in Nadia. 
The bathing ghat of Madhai, called after his 
name, has now disappeared. Narahari who wrote 
the Bhaktiratnakar about 1725 A.D. had seen it; 
and Mahamahopadhyay Ajitanath Nayaratna of 
Nadia tells me that he saw in his childhood some 
bricks of the old ghat.^ He is now verging on 75.' 

^ The old scholar died last year. 



156 CH AIT ANY A AND HIS AGE 

Like all events of Nimai's life associated with 
Nadia, the simple story of the reformation of 
these two ruffians has hecome mixed up with 
marrellous tales. It is stated in the Chaitanya 
Bhagavata that Nimai, angry at the conduct of 
Madhai, called for the disc which belonged to 
Vishnu and on which he, as that god's incarna- 
tion, had every claim. And the disc came rolling 
in the air, g,nd the ruffians were completely 
overawed by seeing the divine weapon. We shall 
later on find in more authentic records, stories of 
many similar reformatio ns ; but there Nimai 
did his work by the simple marvel of his love 
and faith. 

Just about this time Nimai organised a dra- 
matic performance at Nadia. 

of ^KSiTna ^fr"" I* ^^« °f ^o^rse about Krishna. 
Krishna according to the legend 
in the Mahabharata had taken away Rukmini 
from her father's house by force. The old king 
her father, had settled her marriage elsewhere. 
But EiUkmini had written a letter to Krishna 
saying that she had resolved to give herself up 
to him and none else. So when all the princes 
had gathered to witness the marriage, Krishna 
carried away the bride in a chariot — Rukmini 
herself doing the work of a charioteer. Krishna 
shot arrows on all sides to disperse the army 
that pursued them. So it was a very romantic 
situation. 



THE KRISHI^A PLAY 157 

The performance was held at the house of 
Ohandrasekhar. Buddhimanta Khan supplied 
the requisite costumes and jewellery. Adwaita- 
charya became the stage-manager. As the 
spiritual love in the play might be mistaken for 
sexual romance, Nimai had said before the com- 
mencing of the performance " Those that have 
fully controlled their passions should be privi- 
leged to witness the play." Upon which Adwaita 
said that he could not say that he was worthy. 
Sribasa also in clear language declared that he 
was not above human passion, upon which Nimai 
smiled and did not press his point. Adwaita 
played the fool's part and Sriman that of a 
sweeper. The performances of the two created 
much humour and mirth. Haridas, as the head 
of His Majesty's police force, came on with a pair 
of peculiarly cut whiskers and a huge turban. 
Narada with his long flowing white beard and 
a lyre that hung down from his shoulders had 
so marvellously changed himself that none but 
his wife Malini could recognise him to be Sribasa. 

But when Nimai came from the green room 
dressed as Rukmini, the princess, even his mother 
could not recognise him . The spectators questioned 
if the figure before them was Sita or Lakshmi or 
kindness or love that had come there assuming a 
human shape. B/ukmini wrote her love-letter to 
Krishna. Here her tears were real, for Nimai had 
forgot that he had been playing the part of the 



158 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

princess aud was in his love-ecstasies at the re- 
collQction Krishna. What he wrote playing the 
part of Rukmini he could not read, for his voice 
was choked with tears. The romance became real 
and the audience were taken by surprise at the 
emotion of the players, especially of Nimai — 
elevating them to a high spiritual plane. The 
play continued till dawn exciting a warm inter- 
est supplied by the real spiritual emotion of the 
bhaktas, and when the first streaks of the sun's 
rays entered the stage they thought that the happy 
night had ended too soon. According to Ohaitanya 
Chandrodaya by Kavikarnapur the drama played 
by Nimai was about Radha and Krishna, and not 
about Rukmini — Nimai is represented by that 
authority to have played the part of Radha. It 
does not materially alter the situation. For 
whether Radha or Rukmini, Nimai had played 
the part of one lost in Krishna's love. That 
Sribasa played the part of Narada, a common 
figure in both the plays, is admitted by 
both accounts. According to one account Nitya- 
nanda played the part of an old woman who 
carried Rukmini's love letter to Krishna and 
according to the other he figured as Yogamaya, 
who was also an old woman carrying Radha's 
love messages to Krishna. There are certainly 
some points of difference between the two plays 
but I think we should credit the account of 
Chaitanya Bhagavata, the author having heard 



INTENSE LOVR FOR XRlSHNA 159 

everything from Nityananda himself who had 
taken an active part in the play. Chaitanya 
Chandrodaya Natak was written in 1572 
A.D. and Chaitanya Bhagavata in 1573 A.I>. 
Both the works are no douht admitted by 
orthodox Vaishnabs as authoritative on Nimai's 
life. The Chaitanya Bhagavata was written 
a year after the Chaitanya Chandrodaya, and 
no doubt corrected the mis-statement of the 
latter work on this point. 

Thus we find Nimai Pandit's intense love for 
Krishna expressing itself in hundreds of ways 
by which he attracted people. Murari Gupta's 
Chaitanya Charitam says " "When left alone at 
home he wept all night for Krishna's love." 
Govinda Das says " If any one makes the slightest 
reference to Krishna his eyes become full of 
tears." " In his heart," says the latter, " he bears 
the pain of separation from Krishna which gives 
him no rest." Bashu Ghosh says that " his looks 
are constantly towards where the flowers bloom 
and he suppresses with some effort the tears 
that come to his eyes at the sight of the lotuses 
as if they remind him of some One." Lochan 
describes him as reclining in his trances on the 
arms of Narahari and Gadadhar, shedding tears 
from his closed eyes, and Bashudev asks in a 
song " What is the thought in which he remains 
absorbed resting his chin on his hand ? Look 
how he enters his room and comes out again 



160 chaitanya. and his age 

without any cause. Why does he look so sad 
to-day ? ' Some one will come to me '^ he says 
and sheds tears !" This abstraction and. ecstacy 
proved a fascination, and each word that fell from 
him while in a trance sounded sweet as a note 
of a lyre, irresistibly attracting people's minds. 

The pain caused by love for Krishna became 
more and more intensified as time passed on, 
till he entirely lost all touch with his environ- 

ntjfs ^- M^9t^ ^^ ^^% I 
SR Jf^ ^^ ^'?rs f^<FK II 

C^ 'srf^ej (Tf "sit^si ^ jpo^ ;(^ n" 

Gour., p. 313. 

c^<?rt^ TW^ (atetsTf^r I 
^c«i ^«i ^?n:?t T5W— 315. 

GrO'ir., p. 317. 



MOTHER'S MISGIVINGS 161 

meut and seemed to live in the poetic plane of 
his godly vision. And Sachi Devi now felt that 
the family tie was held in very little regard 
by her son. She felt greatly depressed in 
spirit and frightened whenever she saw any 
sanyasi coming to Nimai. Keshab Bharati, the 
reputed Vaishnab ascetic, had come to Nadia 
and Nimai was observed to pay more than usual 
regards to him. Sachi silently approached 
Nimai and said softly with tearful eyes, " Why 
have I this weakness that if anybody speaks 
of scmyasis, I feel a chill in my heart ? 
The other day you paid great reverence to 
Keshab Bharati. Why did you do so ? My heart 
was filled with terror at the sight. Tell me 
my dear, assure me, that you will not turn 
sanyasi." Nimai said in reply, " Why do you 
indulge in all these foolish fears ? How can I 
think of cutting my ties with Nadia ? " Then 
said Sachi again, " My eldest son Bishwarup had 
given me a manuscript and told me that it should 
be kept for Nimai for his use when he would 
grow up and become a scholar. I had kept the 

manuscript with me long, but 
coStirt:*;' ''' when Biswarup had turned a 

sanyasi and left me, I thought 
that it contained a message of sanyas for you and 
I burnt it." Nimai was very sorry at having lost 
the precious manuscript — a gift from his brother. 
But when Sachi Devi expressed her remorse and 

21 



16a CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

prayed for pardon, he said, " It ill becomes you, 
good mother, to ask pardon of me, your son. 
There can be no offence for which you can do so. 
In all matters it is I who should ask pardon." 

Thus a few months before Nimai resolved to 
turn a sant/asi, a presentiment had been already 
working in the mind of Sachi Devi. In the court- 
yard of Sribasa where kirtana songs and dance 
went on every night, only a selected party, as I 
have already said, had access. At the gate of the 
house, Ganga Das, the old teacher of Nimai, acted 
as a guard to keep out crowd. 

A curse on Nimai. -. -r» i • i 

Once a israhmm who was an 
ardent admirer of Nimai wanted to enter but was 
not allowed. The next day he met Nimai on the 
banks of the Ganges. In great rage he tore off 
his sacred thread and uttered a curse, " As you 
kept me outside and didn't allow me to hear the 
kirtan, may you remain outside your home, the 
rest of your life." Nimai smiled and said " This 
is not a curse Brahmin, it is a blessing." 

The Sankirtan party now came out in the 
public streets oftener and there used to be 
immense gatherings on such occasions. So great 
was the fascination created by Nimai's presence 
that, wherever Nimai was found to sing and dance 
in the midst of the procession, hundreds of torches 
were lighted to get a sight of his face. In 
such processions fourteen tabors usually sounded 
together, and a poet who was an eye-witness 



A MESSAGE FOR THE SCEPTICAL AGE 163 

describes how old Adwaitacharya looked grand 
with brows pursed up and charming gestures of 
hands, as he kept time while singing/ Nimai 
was always in a state of frenzy, communing with 
Krishna with tearful eyes. Sometimes the sight 
of blooming flowers or the note of a bird reminded 
him of the Brinda-groves and, immersed in joy, 
he gradually lost his senses. People of India 
had for long been longing for a saintly personality 
who would show by his life the absolute saving 
power of the idea of devotion. The six schools 
of philosophy and all the current theological 
controversies in which subtle reasonings predomi- 
nated could not give them any peace of mind. 
In fact the world had already grown weary of 
this cold and heartless intellectualism. They saw 
Nimai in actual touch with God, nay in him they 
had found a man who loved God more than 
a wife ever loved her husband or a mother her 
child. In that dry and sceptical epoch of our 
history, it was a revelation to all that one unseen 
and unknown could be so greatly loved. But 
however highly the popular sentiments might 
have been in favour of this attitude to God, the 
scholars of Nadia and the advanced students of 
her tols were too proud, as already stated, to 
accept it. The emotional religion repelled them, 
as it rejected reasoning and intellectual subtleties 
which reigned supreme in the Nadia-colleges. 



G. P. T., p. 339. 



CHAPTER VI. 

(«) Chaitanya's Sani/as. 

(fi) His tour — visit to Santipur. 

(e) The incidents at Puri. 

{d) His resolve to go to the Deeean. 

Nimai now resolved to take the step so dreaded 
by his mother and friends. In 
. SaT'^' *° '''''' t,he first week of February, 1509, 
he disclosed his intention of 
turning sanyasi to Mukunda. He said " The 
scholars of Nadia are still hostile to me. They 
have gone so far as to threaten to assault me. I 
shall see how they do it ; for I shall be a beggar 
at their doors for Krishna's love." So long as he 
was a house-holder the country would not accept 
his spiritual services to mankind as absolutely 
disinterested and prompted by the highest of 
motives. A tangible proof of renunciation in the 
shape of the severance of all earthly ties was the 
instinctive demand of a people that was accus- 
tomed to associate religion with the entire self- 
dedication of an ascetic. It was dire news to 
the people who were fondly attached to him, and 
they numbered thousands. They all, however, 



THE GENERAL MOURNING 165 

knew that his word was inexorable. On the 
30th of Magha (raid-February) 1609 A.D. he 
took leave of Sachi Devi and with a single fol- 
lower Govinda started early in the morning for 
Katwa. The mother lay unconscious over- 
whelmed with grief, for a sanyasi would never 
visit his home again. The morning marked the 
beginning of a universal mourning throughout 
Nadia. "The images of god," describes a poet, 
"in Nadia-temples looked pale." Another ac- 
count says that all the shops were closed in that 
city and no one smiled. Vashu Ghosh asks in a 
song, " What are a ou doing, Oh people of Nadia, 
this is not the time for you to sit stupefied by 
grief, stretch your hands to stop him." Nitya- 
nanda cries like a child, and Sribasa at his court- 
yard, where there were music and dancing every 
night, sobs aloud and is mad with grief. " He 
spoke of nothing but of Nimai after his desertion 
of Nadia and dreamt of him in his sleep. Often 
while gathering flowers for worship he recollected 
Nimai and the basket of flowers fell from his 
unconscious hands as he lay lost in reveries. 
Sometimes going to the banks 
sribasa'a grief. ^j ^^^ Ganges he missed his 

great companion and sat for 
hours together meditating on him who was dearer 
to him than everything else in the world, and he 
forgot that he had come there to bathe. In his 
own courtyard the Sankirtana party sang the 



166 CIlAITANYA AND HlS AGE 

praises of the Lord again with the high sounding 
cymbals, the tumbrel and dance and he stood 
there listening to the singers ; but often his voice 
was choked with tears and he fell down on the 
bare earth in grief crying like a child. Some- 
times he felt that the God of his songs and Nimai 
were the same, so that while offering flowers to 
Krishna, instead of saying " I bow to thee, Oh 
Krishna " he said unconsciously " I bow to thee, 
XDh Nimai." And, as he remembered himself, 
tears rolled down his cheeks." 

When Sribasa met Sachi Devi on the day of 
Nimai's desertion, she said " Everything that you 
see in this house belongs to you all. I have 
nothing to do with these. I have nothing in this 
world to call mine." Bishnupriya, the young 
wife, practically gave up eating. She never lifted 
her face to look at any one, only one or two maids 
remained with her. On the day previous to that 
of Nimai's desertion of home "she went" says 
a poet, " to bathe in the Ganges. She heard 
something there and when she came back she 
was in tears. The mother-in-law asked, " What 
is it that ails thee, child P " But she wept and 
could not speak. Another poet describes her 
seeking Nimai in her sleep in the bed, when he 
had gone away, and then with her mother-in- 
law running in the streets enquiring of every 
passer-by if he had seen him going. When 
Sachi Devi heard that her son had gone to 



SAClirS GRIEF 167 

Kanehannagore to become a aanyasi, she ex- 
claimed, " Do not call it Kanehannagore {lit. 
golden city) it is Kantaknagore, the - city of 
thorns." The popular belief is that Katwa which 
is an abbreviation of Kantaknagore is a name 
given to that city by Sachi Devi. T have not, 
however, found this tradition supported by any 
written record. Sachi is said to have fasted for 
12 days, and Bashu Ghosh says that one night 
towards its close when Malini — Sribasa's wife — 
came out of her room, she saw some one lying 
on the bare ground of the courtyard where Nimai 
had danced and sung a hundred times. Coming 
nearer she discovered Sachi lying on the dusty 
ground in that dead hour of night, weeping. 
She embraced her and they both wept without 
saying a word. One morning, according to 
another poet, Sachi described to Malini a dream 
in which she saw Nimai approach her and say, 
" Mother, I have travelled to many places as a 
mnyaai, but nowhere could I stay without seeing 
you " and when, charmed with the familiar voice 
she came out of her room, her dream had vanished. 

Sis tour and visit to Santipur. 

All this grief, and these outbursts of popular 

feeling could not, however, stop Nimai from his 

, course. He proceeded towards 

Leaves home and '■ 

reaches Katwa. Katwa iu all hastc, drivcn by 

his emotion, " like a flower " says a poet and 



168 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

biographer, "swept by rushing wind." Some- 
times he embraced a tree in the way mistaking 
it for Krishna, and fell senseless on the ground 
at the sight of the Ganges mistaking it to be 
the Jamuna. At Kanchannagore he stopped. 
Govinda Karmakar's wife came there and soli- 
cited Nimai that he might allow her husband to 
return home. Nimai told her that it was good 
for his soul to devote himself to spiritual pur- 
suits and to the good of the world. But the 
importunate cryings of ' Sashi-mukhi ' moved 
him and he ordered Govinda to go back home. 
But Govinda after a stay of a few hours at 
Kanchannagore ran in all haste to overtake 
Nimai who had gone a few miles ahead of him. 
Nimai reached Katwa on the evening of the 
30th March, Saka 1430 corresponding to 1509, 
A.D. There hundreds of men and women gathered 
to see him. From under a bel tree he gave 
instruction to them. They listened to him with 
great respect and attention, but all people re- 
gretted his sanyas as he was young, and the 
women-folk particularly. They said " How would 
his poor mother and wife live, parted from him 
for ever ? " Kesbab Bharati was to be his Guru. 
They all tried to persuade Kesbab to refuse him 
initiation into sanyas at that young age. Keshab 
acceding to their request told Nimai that his 
was not the proper age for sanyas. But Nimas 
said, " If I die early, I shall be deprived of the 



KRISHNA-CHAITANYA 169 

chance of following the best path for men." 
His great love for God and eloquent appeal could 
not be resisted, and the Bharati consented. A 
barber named Deva^ was called to shave his 
head. The women of the town said "Deva, do not 
do such a cruel thing. Do not cut off such fine 
curling hair." This shaving of the head implied 
the cutting off of all family ties, so when the 
barber applied the razor to his hair the women 
stood there like silent pictures and shed tears. 

He had his head shaven, and when wearing: 
an ochre coloured cloth, the young sanyasi stood 
up "he looked" as a poet says " like mount Sumeru 
clad in clouds of deep purple." This was the 
ideal life towards which the enlightened in India 
have always moved — the severance of the family- 
ties and adoption of a cosmopolitan life for the 
good of the vrorld. Nimai as a sanyasi was given 
the name of Krishna Ohaitanya or one having 
God-consciousness. Though not literally, the 
name Ohaitanya has nearly thesalne significance 
as the Buddha or the enlightened one. We find 
in an old'record that the name Krishna Ohaitanya 

' Ihe popular belief is that the name of the barber was Madhu. But 
in Govinda Das'8 Jearcha we find the name Dera distinctly meutoned 
and therefore cannot disbelieve the word of an eye-witness. " Madhu " 
seems to be a general name for the barber who shaves a man before 
his sanyas. In the Mainamati songs, we find " Madhu " shaving Raja 
Gopiohandra on the eve of his sanyas. If Madhu is a traditional 
name given on such occasions, the popular belief and the evidence of 
the eye-witness may both be accepted in this case, 

22 



170 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

in the place of Nimai, sounded strange to the 
ears of the Nadia people. Henceforth, however, 
we shall call him Chaitanya the name by which 
he is popularly known everywhere. 

The news of his aanyas had by this time 
spread all over the country, and at Nadia it was 

received with great sorrow. 

Even the non-believers who had 
reviled Nimai repented of their conduct and joined 
the general mourning. After sanyas Chaitanya 
came to Kulia, where a large crowd from Nadia 
and neighbouring places assembled to see the new 
scmyctsi. " So great was the excitement " says 
Brindaban Das " that hundreds of men tried to 
cross the Ganges to go to Kulia and though 
all the ferry-boats were engaged and filled to 
their utmost capacity they were not equal to 
the demand. Many swam across the river, 
others seated in earthen jars plied them 
across the Ganges. Some cut banana-plants 
and made rafts. Many boats sank in mid- 
Ganges owing to the excessive crowd and these 
people had to swim across the river." They 
were all eager to have a sight of their God -man 
who was never to visit Nadia again, and Bashu 
Ghosh the poet regrets his sanyas in these words 
" Those days of music and dance and God-intoxi- 
cation are over at Nadia, we shall not have them 
again — the thought pierces the heart like a 
dagger. " 



THE HOLY NAME 171 

Govinda Karmakar along with other bio- 
graphers have mentioned the names of the 
noteworthy men who went to meet Chaitanya 
at Katwa. Other books mention only the 
names of the orthodox Vaishnabs. But Govin- 
da gives also the names of the distinguished 
visitors outside the Vaishnab community, who 
had joined the assembly. We find these names 
not recorded elsewhere : — Chanda Chandeswar, 
Kasiswar Nayaratna, Panchanan Vedantik. They 
are spoken of as princes amongst Pandits. 

After scmyas Chaitanya felt himself free from 
all worldly bonds and his heightened emotions 
and ecstasies became marked. He had, on the 
eve of his sanyas, proclaimed to all his object : 
" I shall wander from house to house giving the 
holy name of God to all. The Chandals — the 
lowest caste — women and children all will 
stand with wonder and love to hear His name. 
Even boys and girls will sing His praise. The 
Aghore Panthis and other vicious tantriks will 
be attracted by His sweet name. The banner 
of His name will wave high in the air. Prin- 
ces and poor men alike will sing His glory. If 
I do not turn a sanyasi how will the sinners and 
those that are stung with the world's sorrows 
be saved ? My heart weeps to see the misery of 
the people around. " 

The great saviour may not have a high re- 
cognition from the aristocracy. But look at the 



172 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

rural villages of Bengal and see how the poor 
people — the artizans, the labouring classes, the 
beggars and the diseased ones throughout this 
great province — have placed in their heart a 
throne for Chaitanya whose heart wept for their 
sorrows. This throne is far more glorious than 
that of an Emperor who has ever laid claim to 
recognition and immortal fame. In the even- 
ings go to the huts of rustics in any village of 
Bengal however insignificant, and you will find 
the artisans and peasants gathered in a room 
at the close of their day's work and singing the 
name of Chaitanya " the friend of the fallen. " 
The merry sound of the cymbals and mandira 
accompanied by the deep-mouthed voice of the 
khola, giving a sweet and solemn grace to the 
songs sung in chorus. In the mornings the 
Vaisnava ascetic visits every house and sings 
the praise of Chaitanya in this strain : — " Name 
him, my good man, and I shall hold you dear 
as my life. " What prince at the dawn of the 
day and towards its close receives such a univer- 
sal tribute of sincere affection and esteem ? 

As he proceeded on his way to the south, 
his emotion gave him no rest and he so totally lost 
himself in his felicitous communion with God 
that he cared not for food or the needs of his 
physical body. Once for three days he fasted, 
and wherever he saw a river, the memory of the 
Jamuna in whose stream Krishna had sported 



INTERVIEW 173 

came so vehemently into his mind that he ran to 
jump into it weeping and crying. Nityananda 
took advantage of this, and when Chaitanya 
told him that he was going to the Brinda- 
groves, he said " I will lead you thither. " The 
Ganges was shown him and falsely called the 
Jamuna, and Chaitanya in great love followed 
his guide along her banks till they reached 
Santipur. He brought Chaitanya by this trick 
to Adwaita's house. And Chaitanya, when he 
knew that he was duped, was not sorry, for 
he was glad to see Adwaitacharya again. 
Adwaita was 76 years old at the time, but his 
devotion to God and Chaitanya was wonderful. 
He was a rich man and lived in a great man- 
sion called the ' Vpakarika ' or the ' beneficient 
home. ' He had longed to meet the young 
scmyasi and made great preparations for his 
reception. He, besides, sent a message to Nadia 
asking Sachi Devi to come and see her dear 
son at his own. The message was received by 
Sachi Devi with tears and she said " How shall I 
bear the sight of his shaven head ? I shall not 

go to Santipur to see that 
Adll^ait.^ ""^^ ° sight, — rather I will go to the 

Ganges and drown myself. " 
Though she said so in grief, she left Nadia for 
Santipur in great haste. The interview be- 
tween the mother and the son was full of 
pathos. Chaitanya found his mother reduced 



174 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

to a skeleton owing to grief and fasts, and she saw 
him, in the words of the poet, " shaven of his 
beautiful curling hair, and greatly reduced he 
wore a kaupm as the mnyasis do, with an outer 
cloth hanging from his shoulders. His body 
was besmeared with dust and he looked like a 
mad man abstractly gazing at the sky and 
shedding tears. " Then the mother said "You are 
going to preach religion to the world. Is 
desertion of a poor mother and wife a part of 
that religion ? Behaving in this way, how can 
you be fit for teaching religion to others ? Don't 
you know that I have none else in this world 
besides you ? Return home and go on singing 
God's name with Sribasa and others as you used 
to do. I shall engage Brahmins to invest you 
with the sacred thread again though you have 
left them." Nimai seemed to be greatly moved 
but said " For the cause of universal good, 
mother, this renunciation must be made. Think 
of Kausalya who gave permission to Ram to go 
to the forest, — of Devahuti, who permitted 
Kapila to turn an ascetic. You and Bishnu- 
priya will surely find me ever near you ; for in 
spirit, good mother, I can never be far away. 
In your kitchen where you prepare food, you 
will feel my presence ; for there is nothing so 

' For a Brahmin who gives up his sacred thread, a penance is 
necessary to resume them involving the observance of some sacred 
rites. 



MOTHER AlSft) SON 175 

delicious, mother, as your preparations. " Then 
Sachi, whose tears flowed as did her son's, 
slowly said again " Bishwarup turned a sanyasi 
and never saw me again, do not he so cruel. " 
To which her son sweetly replied, " Mother, this 
body of mine has sprung from you — it is yours. 
How can I requite the immense debt of your 
affection. "Wherever you will order me to stay 
I shall stay there. " And saying so he bowed 
to his mother again and again. But when 
Adwaita asked him to stay there for some time, 
he said " It is not proper for a sanyasi to live 
anywhere accompanied by his relations. " 
Adwaita had made vast preparations for his 
reception. Looking at the rich food served 
before him, prepared by Sita — Adwaita's wife, 
Chaitanya said, — " This food is not proper for a 
sany isi. How can an ascetic learn abstinence 
so necessary for self control, if you tempt him 
in this way. " 

The Kirtana sounded its high music for ten 
days, and the God-intoxicated youth was in the 
height of his emotional felicities and passed into 
trances often and fell down on the bare earth 
in an unconscious state. Sachi's anxious soliciti- 
tude for her son was full of pathos on such 
occasions. She made entreaties to Adwaita 
and to every one present, to hold her son fast 
so that he might not be hurt by his fall. 
Twenty-four years after this time Chaitanya 



176 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

passed away from this world having an inflamma- 
tory fever caused by a hurt on his foot from such 
a fall at Puri. 

Then he left Santipur, as already stated, after 
a stay of ten days. Adwaita was disconsolate 
and went some distance with him ; while bidding 
him farewell the old man cried like a child ; 
upon which Chaitinya mildly admonished him 
saying " If a veteran scholar and aged man like 
you behave in this way, how can I trust my 
poor mother to your care ?" 

(c) The incidents at Puri. 

On leaving Santipur Chaitanya came to 
Kanchannagore in the district 

On the way to Puri. « -r, i 1,1 • 

01 Burdwan and then crossing 
the Damodar came to the house of a rich man 
named Kashi Misra who had made great prepa- 
rations for his reception. A very fine rice was 
served him and he asked " "What do you call this 
rice ?" They said " Its name is Gopalbhoga 
(Lit., meal of Krishna)". On hearing this, at the 
mention of Ktishna's name, tears rolled down 
his cheeks, and he passed into a trance. Then 
for sometime he was in a state of unconscious- 
ness, running after and pursuing his vision like 
a mad man with tears which never ceased. 
Nityananda followed him like a shadow. One day 
he stopped and staring at Nityananda said " Who 



ON THE WAY TO PURI 177 

are you ?" Nityananda was grieved to see him 
in this state of frenzy. Erom Kashi Misra's 
house he went to Hazipur where a rich young 
man named Keshab Samanta called on him and 
offered him money saying, " Here accept this gift 
from me and satisfy your desires. Leave this 
profession which is wicked, for you want to 
deceive people, — surely one so young cannot he 
an ascetic." Ohaitanya gave him many instruc- 
tions in course of which he remarked " Just as a 
man drowned in a river cannot see what takes 
place on her banks, even so does a man fail to 
realise his real condition, being lost in world's 
desires." It appears, however, that Keshab 
Samanta was not convinced. Ohaitanya said to 
Govinda, his companion, "Let us go to Narayan- 
pur. There is no good staying at Hazipur." At 
the latter place two very respectable and wealthy 
men came riding elephants, gaudily caparisoned. 
They were Bireswar Sen and Bhawanisankar who 
were wonder-struck by seeing Chaitanya's fervour 
of devotion. From Hazipur he went to Jaleshwar 
and here he crossed the Subarnarekha and then 
visited Balasore. He crossed the Baitarani and 
the Mahanadi and visited Amarda and B/am- 
chandrapur. Here a high official named Ram 
Chandra Khan helped him to cross the river. 
The tridents of the contending chiefs were 
planted in the place marking boundaries, and no 
one was allowed to go from one country to 
i}3 



]78 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

another on pain of death. This refers to the ani- 
mosity carried on with great force between 
Raja Pratap Rudra of Orissa and Hussain Shah, 
the Gour-Emperor. The boatmen employed by 
Ram Chandra Khan advised Chaitanya and those 
that followed him not to speak aloud as the 
spies of the Mahomedans were everywhere. But 
Chaitanya, quite fearless, sang aloud God's name 
saying that the recitation of the holy name 
would drive away all danger. He next visited 
Jajpur on the banks of the Papahara, and Jaya- 
nanda states that he stayed there at the house 
of one Kamalalochan, who was a member of the 
family of which Chaitanya was a scion. It 
should be remembered that the ancestors of 
Chaitanya were originally inhabitants of Jajpur. 
From Jajpur he marched to the shrines of 
Shiveswar, Jameswar and then came up to see 
the famous temples of Kanarak and Bhubaneswar. 
Reaching Alalnath he saw from far the great 
flag of the Puri temple, sparkling with its gold- 
embroidered decorations in the morning sun. 
The sight filled him with strange ecstasy. He 
wept for joy and cried aloud, — " I have found 
Him at last." 

Accounts differ about this tour to Puri. 
Chaitanya Charitamrita says that after having 
visited Puri, Chaitanya started for Brindaban 
but going up to the village of Ramkeli near 
Gour he came back to Puri vid Santipur. But 



VISIT TO The temple 179 

Brindaban Das and Govindadas speak of the 
visit to Santipur as having taken place during 
his tour from Katwa to Puri. In matters of 
chronology of events we can hardly rely much 
upon the accounts of Chaitanya Charitamrita, 
written many years after Chaitanya had paid his 
first visit to Puri. Krishna Das Kaviraj, the 
author, himself admits that in points of chrono- 
logy of events, he cannot always vouch for the 
accuracy of his statements. Visiting the Puri- 
temple Chaitanya is said to have been so over- 
powered by emotion that he forcibly made his way 
through all obstructions of the priests and came 
up to the very pedestal of the sacred images. 
There he fell senseless and was whipped by the 
priests who had taken him for a mad man. 
Basudev Sarbabhauma, the great scholar, had by 
chance come to the temple about this time and 
was struck by the sight of the unconscious young 
man who looked bright as a god, and who 
though senseless had been shedding tears of joy, 
heedless of the strokes of whip that fell on his 
back. He learned that the young man belonged 
to Nadia, his own native place. 

Different accounts i i • • j i_ • i • 

regarding his first and his mtcrest in him was 
^isit to the temple. farther rouscd on hearing that 

he was a grandson of Nilambar Chakrabarti — a 
great friend of Sarbabhauma's father Bisarad. By 
his order, Chaitanya, still unconscious, was carried 
to his house. But the Chaitanya Chandrodaya 



180 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

gives a different account. It says that Chaitanya 
as a young ascetic had attracted Sarbabhaum's 
attention from the very first, and before going 
to visit the Puri temple, he had accepted the 
hospitality of Basudev, and staying at night 
with him, early in the morning of the day after 
he had reached Puri, paid his visit to the temple. 
The description given by Kavikarnapur is very 
poetic. The doors of the temple are opened 
and a sweet music bursts forth announcing the 
time for public entry. From the doors rushes 
forth the fragrance of a thousand lilies and other 
flowers. Chaitanya enters the temple delighted 
and entranced by the sweet smell and by the 
sight of a hundred blue gems in the temple thai 
reflect the rays of the morning sun. However 
poetic this description may be, we prefer to 
believe in the accounts of Chaitanya Bhagavata, 
the Chaitanya Oharitamrita and other biogra- 
phies on this point. For it seems by no means 
creditable, that Chaitanya, reaching Puri, would 
brook the delay of a moment in visiting the 
temple. In regard to the account of subsequent 
events at Puri, all biographers are, however, 

unanimous. It is certain that 
vasu'neTr^^'^^'"" ° Basudev Sarbabhaum, the great 

champion of non-dualistic creed, 
had little regard for the hhakti cult. He took 
Chaitanya for a young man led astray and seized 
by a mania. He said to one of his people, " Having 



VASUDEV AND CHAlTANYA 181 

left home he feels a great sorrow and recollect- 
ing his wife, he weeps which they take as a sign 
of his devotion to Krishna. He is harely 24. 
This is not the age for sanyas. Let him return 
home subjecting himself to proper penance ^ and 
acquire a knowledge of the Upanishads which 
will teach him his duties. Dancing and singing 
do not become an ascetic. And how is it that 
every time meal is served to Jagannath in the 
temple he partakes of it. A semyasi must not 
eat at all times." Mukunda, Gopinath and other 
followers of Chaitanya were sorry at this remark 
but they said nothing. Basudev called Chaitanya 
to his presence and said " Young man, you know 
that Ishwar Puri and others took sanyas when 
two-thirds of their life had passed. What right 
have you to become a sanyasi at this tender 
age ?" Chaitanya replied meekly " Yes, Sir, it 
is even so. But why do you mistake me for a 
sanyasi P I have lost all control over myself, 
parted from Krishna. It is for this that I have 
shaven my head and torn off the sacred thread. 
Do not. Sir, think me to be so exalted a person 
as a sanyasi. I am a very humble person. Bless 
me that my soul may find rest in Krishna's 
love." As he said this he wept, and Basudev 
was impressed with the meekness and sincerity 



• Penance is to be undergone by one who having once adopted 
sanyas, would like to return to home-life. 



182 CHAiTANYA AND HIS AGE 

of the lad. He advised him to listen to his dis- 
courses on Vedanta Philosophy that he delivered 
every evening; and Ohaitanya meekly sat 
amongst the audience every day and said not a 
word. On the day when Basudev finished his 
lectures, he said " Many of those who attended 
my discourses raised points to be cleared by me, 
and I tried my best to solve the questions. But 
you, who are reported to be a scholar, never 
spoke a word, but sat plunged in your own 
emotions, apparently not heeding my lectures. 
Will you tell me what you have learnt from my 
discourse?" Ohaitanya replied very humbly 
" Sir your learning is vast. Your eloquence is 
great and you have the power of creating a 
wonderful impression by your speech, but your 
views have not always appealed to me." And 
Basudev, the veteran scholar, wonderingly asked 
" What could your views be, child, that do not 
agree with mine ? " Then a regular discussion 
took place in which the dualistic views were put 
forth with so much force by Ohaitanya that 
Basudev waivered in his argumentation to up- 
hold the pantheistic theory. The God without 
quality, without form, inactive, and inert, mani- 
festing himself in every object of the universe and 
identical with it, could not hold His own against 
the God, kind, loving and merciful and even 
willing to save people from their sins. And when 
Basudev interpreted the text of the Bhagavata 



THE DEBATE 183 

( Sk. 1, canto 7, verse 11) in nine different 
ways striking the audience witli his scholarship 
and intellectual suhtleties, Chaitanya gave 18 
different interpretations to it, in which , none of 
the points raised by Basudev was touched, but 
which at once carried his audience to a far 
higher spiritual plane than Basudev could ever 
do. The great emotion, verging on a state of 
poetic frenzy, mingled with eloquence and great 
learning, displayed by Chaitanya had a hypnotic 
effect on Basudev who for sometime had merely 
admired the young ascetic as a brilliant scholar, 
but was now struck to find in him sparks of 
Divinity that he had seen in no one else. He at 
once accepted him as his God and saviour, and 
from that time became one of his staunchest 
followers. The news of Basudev's defeat and 
acceptance of Chaitanya spread all over the 
country, and great scholai'S came to Puri to pay 
their respects to Chaitanya. But how far the 
details of the points of discussion given in the 
Chaitanya Charitamrita are reliable I cannot 
say, for it is found that in course of the debate, 
one party quoted the Bhaktirasamritasindhu 
written in the year 1541 A.D. whereas the debate 
took place in 1509 A. D. The great scholar 
Krishnadas Kaviraj, the author of Chaitanya 
Charitamrita, had identified himself so much 
with the theological views of his school that 
he missed no opportunity of introducing them, 



184 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

though in some cases his scholarly ardour cloud- 
ed his historical sense. The Chaltanya Chandro- 
daya does not speak anything regarding the 
debate. We have rejected the statement made 
in the Chaitanya Charitamrita that Chaitanya 
went to Ramkeli shortly after he had arrived 
at Puri. He must have done so after returning 
from the Deccan about the year 1512 A.D. 

Sometime before Chaitanya came to Puri, 

B.a]'a Pratap Rudra of Orissa had gone to 

Bijaynagar in the Deccan to 

Chaitanya and Baia n ■> j. -ii j.i i • e j.u i. 

Pratap Rudra. ngbt With the king of that 

place. On his return to the 
city Pratap Rudra heard of the great impression 
on his people that Chaitanya's visit to Puri had 
produced. At first he had his doubts. We 
read in Sterling's History of Orissa that this king 
was at fl.rst a Buddhist. He often cut pleasant 
jokes at Ram Rai, his minister, for his fervent 
faith in Vaishnabism. It is therefore quite 
natural that the sight of a sanyasi, who dis- 
played so much emotion and lay besmeared 
with dust, weeping like a woman, should pro- 
duce an unfavourable impression. The Chai- 
tanya Bhagavata tells that this was really the 
case. Chaitanya Charitamrita says that the king 
once said to Sarbabhauma " How is it that the 
ascetic takes meal without bathing or shaving 
himself ? The rules of the shrine do not allow 
it," But though at first he had his doubts, he 



PRATAP RUBRA 185 

soo» felt a great admiration verging on love for 
Chaitanya, as he saw him singing the name of 
God in the midst of his followers. The emotion 
and the poetry of the situation, a young man 
loving God with all his heart, had an effect which 
irresistibly appealed ; and the Raja is said to have 
exclaimed as he saw Chaitanya passing by the 
streets from the roof of his palace: "I never saw 
such a sight, I never heard such music, I never 
saw such dance." The king wanted to be allowed 
to see Chaitanya. But the young ascetic told 
Basudev Sarbabhauma, who communicated the 
king's wish, that as a sanyasi he should keep 
himself aloof from the fountain of power and 
wealth. It is stated in the Chaitanya Chandro- 
daya and Chaitanya Charitamrita that Pratap 
Eiudra felt very sorry at this refusal, and asked 
Basudev and others to intercede for him again, 
regretting that the humblest of his subjects had 
a privilege which was denied him because he was 
a king. But though a king he was poor in spirit 
and claimed admittance to the Master's presence 
on that ground. I think there is an exag- 
geration in the account given by some of these 
biographies that so grieved was the Raja at not 
getting the permission that he fasted for ten 
days. The interview, however, took place 
shortly after. Chaitanya was lying in an un- 
conscious state in the house of Gopinath Acharya, 
when the Eaja stole into the room and held 

24 



186 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

fast the Master's feet with imploring l«oks. 
A picture drawn half a century later showing 
Chaitanya and Pratap Rudra in this situation, 
will be found reproduced in my work "Chai- 
tanya and his Companions." When Chaitanya 
recovered from his trance, he drew his feet off 
and said "Ah ! I have touched a man given to 
worldly power!" But when the Raja bore the 
remark humbly, and said that he was ready to 
give up his power and wealth for the sake of the 
Master, Chaitanya, convinced of his sincerity, 
embraced him in deep love. And Ram Ray, the 
minister and poet, in his celebrated work the 
Jagannath Ballav, wonders as to how such a 
great warrior as the Raja was, whom all Indian 
wrestlers dreaded and who was the most for- 
midable enemy of the Pathans, could be so over- 
powered by emotions as to melt like a soft thing 
at the Master's touch. Govindadas writes: — 
" When the kirtana party passed by the public 
street with Chaitanya in the centre, the king 
Pratap Rudra walked behind them all like the 
very humblest of his subjects." 

Ohaitanya's fame had by this time spread all 
over India, and pilgrims came to Puri to visit him 
as they did to visit Jagannath in the Great Temple. 
We read in the accounts, that presents of rich 
food came to him in large quantities from his 
Nadia-friends and admirers, and the young 
scholar Jagadananda was the custodian of these 



A JAR OF SCENTED OlL ISl 

and Govinda was entrusted to serve them. The 
request in each case to Govindii 

ioot ^'"^''^"' °* ""^ w^s " ^^^J> Govinda, see that 
Chaitanya tastes a little of 
these." Some presented pedo — the famous milk- 
preparation of Gaya, some very nice cakes and 
sarbat. Adwaita Acharya used to send the 
excellent sarpuria, the thickened layer of milk, 
prepared with sugar and spice, for which the 
locality he lived in, is still famous. The amrita 
batiha or the nectar halls also formed one of the 
delicious presents. Sribas sent his sweet cakes 
and karpur kupi — a preparation scented by 
camphor. Various other things were presented 
by Basudev Datta, Murari Gupta, Buddhlmanta 
Khan and others. Young Jagadananda attended 
Chaitanya at the time he took his food and 
insisted on his taking a portion from each of 
these. But Chaitanya stuck to 
his ascetic-vows and would not 
touch any rich food. Jagadananda became 
angry at • such refusals, and silently retired into 
his room with the resolve of not eating anything 
himself. On one occasion a jar of perfumed 
oil was presented to Chaitanya by an admirer. 
The scent was very pleasant and it was the 
ardent wish of Jagadananda that Chaitanya 
would use a little of it at the time of bathing. 
But he did nothing of the kind, and ordered that 
the jar of oil should be sent to the Jagannath 



188 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

temple where the lamps would burn with that 
oil at the time of Evening-Service. Jagadananda 
fasted for three days in anger, and when 
Chaitanya would not still use the oil, he ran 
to the store-room and brought the jar and 
broke it to pieces, and its contents flew down 
in the compound. Chaitanya slept on the bare 
floor and the stone on which he rested his head 
was hard. Jagadananda one day brought a 
pillow for him upon which Chaitanya said 
"Jagadananda should bring a couch for me 
from the palace. This man wants that I should 
enjoy life as worldly men do." 

Damodara one of Chaitanya's constant asso- 
ciates,* and an ascetic who followed the rules of 
his Order to the letter, often reprimanded him for 
not observing too closely the shastric ordinances 
for scmyasis. He even went further and occa- 
sionally gave advice to Chaitanya as regards his 
morals. A Brahmin boy at Puri, greatly devoted 
to Chaitanya, came frequently to pay him 
respects. The mother of the boy was a young 
widow and very handsome. One day Damodara 
said to Chaitanya : — " You are a 

Damodara. god in human shape and privi- 

leged to do as you wish. But 
how can you stop the mouth of the people. Can't 
you judge your situation ? The mother of this 
boy is very beautiful though of course she has 
the reputation of good character. You are a 



A NEW FAMILY AT PURI 189 

youth and have adopted stern asceticism. Why 
do you allow this boy to come to you so often 
and thereby give opportunity to scandal-mon- 
gers ?" And Chaitanya said " I admire you for 
your sound advice. You should go to Nadia ; 
my poor mother and wife will certainly need the 
help of such a disciplinarian and guardian." 

{d) His resolve to go to the Decean. 

Day and night visitors came and allowed no 
rest to Chaitanya. One day he addressed Nitya- 
nanda and others and said " Permit me, brethren, 
to leave Puri and go on a tour to Southern 
India." He referred to Nityananda's having 
broken his ascetic's staff on his way to Puri. 
His intention was that by doing so he would be 
able to make Chaitanya return to his home and 
live there as a house-holder. Turning to Nitya- 
nanda he said again " I do as you wish me to do. 
I have no option to act independently. I was 
going to Brindaban after my sanyas and you 
brought me to Santipur. You deceived me by 
shewing me the Ganges and calling the river 
Jamuna. The affection of you all for me is 
unbounded. But this is a great hindrance to me. 
Jagadananda wants me to taste life's pleasure as 
a worldly man. Whatever he wishes I do for fear. 
For if I do not do so he will not talk with me for 
three days. My friend Mukunda is grieved to see 
nae observe the austerities of an ascetic's life that 



190 CHAtTANYA AND HIS AGE 

I bathe in winter three times every night and 
sleep on the bare ground. I am an ascetic but 
Damodar acts as the guardian of my morals 
and admonishes me for breaking the rules of 
asceticism. He cares for his religion only, but 
I cannot forget that I am a human being and 
liave some duties to do to my fellow-men. For 
all these reasons, you, my friends, should remain 
here and I must go abroad visiting shrines for a 
while."^ Nityananda said that he knew all the 
shrines of India and would act as his guide, and 
hundreds of others offered to accompany him. 
Basudev Sarbabhauma is said to have exclaimed 
thus at the news of Chaitanya's resolve to lea^e 
Puri : — " If a thunder- bolt falls on my head and 
even if my son dies I can perhaps bear that, but 
riot separation from Chaitanya !" But all these 
were of no avail. Chaitanya had perceived that 
a new family had been created at Puri in the 
place of the old one that he had left at Nadia, 
and that he must extricate himself once more 
from the ties of affection to be able to impart 
to millions of people his message of love for God. 
Then probably recollecting that the news of his 
departure from Puri from which his mother 
could always have tidings of him, would cause 
great pain to her, he said that one of the missions 
of his tour in Southern India would be to seek 
out his elder brother Biswarup, 

• The Typical Selections from Old Bengali Literature, Vol. II, p. 1207. 



CHAPTER VII. 

{i) Govinda Das's account of Chaitanya's travel. 
(ii) Reformation o£ sinners, 
(m) Naroji, Bhilpantha, Muraris and Baramukhi. 



(a) Govinda Das's account of GhoAtanya's 
travel. 

Inexorable in his resolve, Ghaitanya with a 
solitary companion left Purl on 

He starts for the ii t,,! i i> -n • i i a i 

Deccan. ths 7th day of Baisakh, Saka 

1432 (1510 A.D.). He had 
stayed at Puri for a little above two months 
from April 1509 A.D. 

We are glad to say that for an account of 
Ghaitanya for a period of two years and ten 
months from the 7th Baisakh, 1432 Saka, during 
his tour in the Deccan, we have a clear and re- 
liable record in the ha/ircha by Govinda Karmakar 
who took notes daily of what he saw and heard. 
Though the karcha begins with 
by'^GovS''" "" "°''' an earlier account, viz., that of 
the period immediately before 
samyas, yet I believe the notes were actually taken 
from the time when Ghaitanya left Puri. The 



192 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

notice of the period of five or six months previous 
to scmyas, is somewhat imperfect and seems evi- 
dently to have been written from memory, whereas 
the notes relating to the latter period are full 
and exhaustive, abounding with graphic sketches 
of all that had taken place. It is natural for us 
to surmise that the idea of jotting down notes 
originated in Govinda's mind in connection with 
Chaitanya's tour in the Deccan. Por at Nadia 
and in Puri there were many scholars who were 
Chaitanya's companions, who, like Sarup, Damodar 
and Murari, were ever ready to record the inci- 
dents of his life ; and an unassuming man like 
Govinda could not possibly have conceived the 
idea of writing a sketch of the Master in the 
presence of these scholars, as his education was 
of a very humble kind. It was w^hen no one 
else could be near to record the events of his 
life, that Govinda felt tempted to do so ; and this 
surmise of ours is substantiated, as already 
staled, by the very nature of the narration of 
facts, the earlier events being written off-hand, 
as if from recollection, and the notes of later 
ones possessing all the freshness and living inter- 
est of a chronicle written on the spot. 

The picture of the Master in this narrative 
is divested from all manner of glorification by 
ascribing supernatural powers to him. Such 
exaggeration in reality in most instances mars 
true glory. The karcha shows how the young 



THE MAD ASCETIC 193 

ascetic wandered from village to village intoxi- 
cated with God's love and passed into trances 
as often as he saw a river, a flower or a newly- 
risen cloud. The sight of this trance was so 
attractive that everywhere it drew large crowds. 
We also read in the karcha that in the midst of 
his maddening love for God, he every now and 
then displayed a great eloquence inspired by 
spiritual fervour, and defeated 

He defeats scholars 

and they accept his the scholarly argumen tations of 
the great pantheist leaders of 
Southern India, such as Ish war Puri of Chandipur, 
Bhargadev of Tripatra and others. Ramgiri, 
the famous Buddhist leader, had a tough fight with 
Chaitanya on spiritual questions. The Raja of 
Trimanda acted as judge. Ramgiri was completely 
defeated and became a follower of Chaitanya 
adopting the Vaishnab name of Haridas. On 
many occasions the extraordinary learning of 
the young ascetic made a great impression ; but 
when establishing the cause of devotion and faith 
by his scholarship, he recited the name of Krishna 
fervently with tears in his eyes and followed his 
vision through woods and marshes, heedless of 
physical pain, they all beheld in hini something 
more than human and accepted him as God. 

At a place called Tripatra we find him 
followed by children who cried out " There goes 
the ascetic mad after God." Some threw dust 
at bim ; his outer robes were all torn and 



194 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

his body was covered with mud. Says Govinda 
"He looks like a mad man." The name of 
-Krishna raised him to a state of poetic frenzy 
and completely distracted him. At Munna we 
find "him giving instructions listened to by 
hundreds of men and women with rapt attention, 
the women shedding tears over pathos created 
by God's name. 



(b) Reformation of Sinners, 

Govinda Das gives several instances where 
Chaitanya reformed sinners. '! he accounts are 
so simple that we can quite understand how 
great faith is capable of sanctifying the lives of 
the fallen. We have seen how a story of simple 
faith, the parallel of which is so often furnished 
by Govinda, was magnified by the Nadia-people 
into a tale of legendary character in which 
Chaitanya is said to have assumed all the power 
and dignity of Vishnu and called on the chakra 
(the divine disc) to punish Jagai and Madhai. But 
punishment is not the adequate means in such 
cases. Even the majesty of Vishnu with his 
mortal disc can terrify the sinner but cannot 
turn him into a saint. Near Bateswar the rich 
young man Tirtharam, given to frivolous plea- 
sures, thought that Chaitanya as a young man 
would easily be captivated by the charms of 
young women, and with that purpose brought 



TIRTKARAM 195 

two very lovely harlots, Satyabai and Lakhibai, 
to try the ascetic's spiritual force. 

"Instructed by Tirtharam they sat near 
Ohaitanya and began to smile, partially uncover- 
ing themselves to display their charms,* But 

et^ Plot's ^ ^« ^«n <F5 II 

JfsSjt^ ^fl|tr|| «|^| TttCg JCTfSH II 

9R 15 ^t Jf®I '2t^ ^511 I 

^1^ cff't 51^ ^ "s^ 'tta iw n 

f?^ pPFtsI 'rtt «t^ 'WJS I 

c<(ra ft^ JT^^I^rl tcis pjTCtcs ii 
c"^ 'sitirt^ '^ 'srW^ ^^ 1 
ii^Tl^ ^ '21^ tfW5r| s(?'ft II 
#151 ^'eta St? ^ts ^ I 
"sis^^^t «ra «ta ^1 -^m^i( II 
sTttros srtf'H '21^ ^ ^ f fa I 
catsitf*® ■^^^a "siaF faffa ii 
l^vm cVl»fN «fpt c^TI ^?^ I 
^ow ^ iftts ^ii a^ '^ II 
'Bft^rfsal tra itlft TtTJ? ^W dt5\ I 

ft'ra c^ ^^ ^^t® 'rtfwta c^ttfl ii 

* # # * 

^ C«ff«t Pit S(ft 1PI PistpFSI I 

sat '5t5re« 1(^ ^aia ^i^ ii 
saci ^^^ ^a sftfi! ?tw ®rt5( 1 

ffa afSt all? fc»i ^ 'sit'satt p 

# * * * 

• a^B^ «Ttf»tfe ^t ' aw flsfa^ i 
5fal ^fa c?? wtt5 «if ^ 5rt^ II' 
itfati ttaoaca '^ "STtf^i^ i 
«r| ^5 ^<at^ ^ f^tsfJi II 
tfaai ^5 "sftft tac*! (JsWa i 

^fs( v5 Slft^ '5^ ^!^ Ttf ^ II" 

Govinda Das's Karoha. pp. 56-58, 



196 CHAITANYA. AND HIS AGE 

Ohaitanya sat quiet singing the name of 

Krishna — unmoved. Lakhi felt that he was 

too far saintly to be led astray by temptations. 

She bowed to him in all humility and 

Ohaitanya remarked " Why do you bow to me, 

mother, humility of others towards me begets 

sin, for I am the humblest of men." Saying 

so he sang the name of Krishna, shedding 

incessant tears ; he sometimes fell down on 

the thorny ground which hurt him and 

sometimes danced in ecstacy of joy. He lost 

all consciousness of the physical world and his 

outer mantle flew away. The wreath of flowers 

that some admirers had put on his neck was torn 

to pieces. He pushed away 

Tirtharam with his feet, quite 

unconscious of the latter's presence. So great was 

his emotion that it moved to tears some of the 

Buddhists who were there. Tirtharam wept, 

falling at his feet and said, "I am a great 

sinner, save me O Lord. " Ohaitanya for 

a while could not speak but recovering from his 

trance embraced Tirtharam and said in a tone 

of deep love " Brother, you are a pious man." This 

made the repentant young man weep and cry 

for mercy. Tirtharam made a gift of his vast 

property to his wife Kamalkumari and taking 

the beggar's bowls in his hands turned a Vaishnab 

mendicant. His friends all said " Look there, this 

fellow is lost." Kabikarnapur had said of 



THE FOREST OP CHORANANDI 197 

Chaitanya ; " The effect of a sight of him is 
wonderful. Whoever heholds him feels God's 
love," Other apostles, saints and prophets, of 
whom we read, communicated their messages 
to the world hy instructions and sermons. But 
Chaitanya worked . wonders in spiritual and 
moral fields, often without any sermon or 
speech. The very sight of him raised people to 
a higher plane of existence, so Kavikarnapur 
was right in saying that the effect of a sight 
of him was wonderful. 



(<?) Naoroji, Bhilpantha, Muraris and Barmukhi. 

In the woods of Choranandi there lived a 
gang of formidable bandits in 

'""°'''' those days headed by Naoroji, 

Chaitanya marched from Munna tojthe forest of 
Bogula of which Choranandi formed a part. 

Ramgiri, a sanyasi, said " Choranandi is no 
shrine.^ What attractions are there for a Sadhu ? 
The woods are infested with wicked men," 
Chaitanya replied " What have I with me that 
these people may rob me of ? " Chaitanya entered 
deep into the forest and sat under a tree. There 
were many bad men there who lived by robbery. 
One fellow spoke a language that was jargon to 
me. Chaitanya talked to him in that language. 
The man stood silent for a while and casting 

' Govinda Das'a Karoha, pp. 146.148. 



198 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

a searching look around, entered the jungle. 
Then came to that spot Naoroji himself, their 
chief, — a strong-built man he came well armed 
with weapons. 

Three or four men came with Naoroji and 
they all bowed to Chaitanya (as he. was an 
ascetic). Naoroji said " Come with me, Sir, you 
will spend the night in my place." Chaitanya 
said " I shall spend the night under this tree." 

" Hearing this he ordered some of his people 
to bring some alms for the sanyasi. They went 
away and Chaitanya sat there singing the name 
of Krishna. Some brought fuel, some sugar, 
milk and butter and others brought rice, fruits 
and sweet roots. They brought heaps of these. 
A keen appetite grew in me at the sight of these 
things. I had travelled with Chaitanya in many 
countries but nowhere did I find such palatable 
things and in such quantities. Placing all this 
food in proper place Naoroji's men stood sur- 
rounding us. At this moment Chaitanya had 
passed into a trance and lost all consciousness. 
And as he danced in joy, his nimble feet 
threw away the heaps of food stored before 
him for he was unaware of everythiug. The 
milk flowed in the ground and fruits were 
crushed under his feet. One or two men among 
them -said ' What sort of sanyasi is this ? He 
is wilfully spoiling the articles.' Naoroji said 
' I never saw a sight like this. Why does my 



NAROJI REFORMED 199 

heart vreep at the sight of this young scmyasi 
to-day ? My heart bursts in grief and remorse. 
What is this snare that the sanyasi has laid 
before me P The food is spoiled, no matter I 
will give again.' 

" Naoroji stood on one side, and looked at 
Chaitanya with eyes full of wondering love. 
Large drops of tears were flowing from Chai- 
tanya's eyes, and the people there stood as 
pictures silently beholding the sight. The news 
had spread, and all the robbers assembled there 
one by one. In the evening Chaitanya fell on 
the ground senseless. His body was trembling 
in great love and tears were incessantly falling 
from his eyes. 

" Naoroji wept aloud and said ' Tell mo, 
young sanyasi, what magic you know. From 
seeing you I feel that I should not live the sort 
of life that I have hitherto done. I am sixty 
years old and a very wicked man, though I am 
a Brahmin by caste. Give me a little dust 
from your feet ; to-day a new chapter in my life 
will open. I shall no more be the leader of 
robbers.' Saying so he looked at his companions 
and threw away the weapons that he had with 
him. 

" Chaitanya said ' Naoroji listen to me. 
Wear a bark-dress ; that will be enough to cover 
your shame ; go and live the life of a mendi- 
cant by begging. If a handful of rice is enough 



200 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

for preserving life what is the use of hoarding 
money by evil ways ? The hollow of your palm 
may serve you as cup, why should you care for 
securing the latter ? The fountain will give you 
excellent water. The millionaires, I say, shall 
have one day to go to the realms of Death. By 
the, same path the Emperor and the meanest of 
his subjects will go.' 

" Naoroji expressed his wish to accompany 
us. He said ' I know all the jungly paths and 
shall be able to act as your guide while visiting 
the various shrines of this cou^itry. Prom 
to-day no more shall I have to do anything 
with these weapons. Oh how many murders 
have I not committed with these hands and what 
vile language have I not spoken with this mouth ! 
No more do I care to be the leader of the 
robbers. You are my saviour and have shown 
me the real path.' Saying so the robber-chief 
left all that he had and accompanied us wear- 
ing a bark dress. Other robbers went away to 
their place, but Naoroji followed us." 

Naoroji accompanied Chaitanya through 
Khandal on the river Mula, Nasik, Panchabati, 
Daman, Varouch near the Tapti up to Baroda. 
After having crossed the Narmada they reached 
Baroda ' Where, ' writes Govinda Das, ' a cala- 
mity befell us after three days' stay. Naoroji 
died of fever. At the moment of his death 
Chaitanya sat near him and tended him with his 



AT BANKOT 201 

own lotus-hands. When his eyes closed for 
ever, Chaitanya sang Krishna's name to his 
ears. Ohaitanya hedged alms from people and 
gave Naoroji a burial there." 

In the Bogula- woods there was another 
Bhiia anthi robber named Bhilapantha, and 

Ohaitanya reformed him in the 
same way. But I think it is not right to say 
that he employed any means consciously for 
reformation. Just as a flower smiles, no matter 
if anybody sees it or not, — its attraction being a 
part of its nature— as a gift from the All-Beautiful 
One, Chaitanya attracted people by the, Charm 
and poetry of his devotion and trances. There 
was no propagandism, the very sight of 
him revealed to them the wonderful beauty 
of spiritual life and the reformation came as 
a matter of course without any conscious effort 
on the part of the reformer. His life was a 
concentrated spiritual force which proved irre- 
sistible in most cases and produced a wonderful 
effect. Says Govinda of Chaitanya " Reduced 
greatly by fasting, so weak that he can scarcely 
walk, he gives the name of Krishna to all from 
door to door. The people of the country (near 
Bankot) speak jargon, yet he imparts love of 
God to them. One who sees Chaitanya has 
not the power to leave the spot." At Bankot 
he lay three days in a trance under a tree. 
During these three days he did not touch any 
36 



20a CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

food. " From Bankot he went to Girishwar 

where he met a sanyasi who 

at GineZar. ^""'"' ^ad taken, the vow of silence. 

This sanyasi was maddened by 

emotions as he saw the trances of Chaitanya. 

Next he went to Panna Narasingha and there 

crossed the Bhadra. He next visited Kalatirtha 

and thence went to Sandhitirtha, ten miles off 

from the former place, on the confluence of 

the rivers Nanda and Bhadra. 

Sadananda Pari. r ~ , i -r, . i 

He met Sadananda Pun there 
and held a discussion in which Puri was beaten 
and he acknowledged Ohaitanya's superiority. 
Thence Chaitanya proceeded towards Chaipalli 
(Trichinopoly) where he met a female anchorite 
hundred years old, looking grand and beautiful 
inspite of her age. Thence he went to Nagar 
" covered with mud, with hair bound into a 
knot, speaking of nothing else but of Krishna 
all the way." 

We find him paying a visit to the Muraris, 

those bad women who professing themselves to 

be the wives of Khandova, the 

The Muraris. 

deity worshipped in the temple 
at Jizuri near Poena, led vicious lives. Their 
leader was Indira Devi, an aged woman, who 
struck with emotion and spiritual fervour of 
Chaitanya became thoroughly reformed. The 
Muraris are still to be seen near Poona. About 
450 years have not improved the state of things. 



AMONGST THE MAHARATTAS 203 

Scholars approached from different localities 
to hold controTersies with him and make him 
adopt pantheism, but went away after debate, 
as convinced Vaishnabs reciting the name of 
Krishna. The women- folk flocked in large 
numbers to have a sight of him everywhere he 
went, for his name and fame had already spread 
up to the farthest interior of Southern India, and 
Govinda says " The women wonderingly asked 
' Is this the famous Chaitanya ? Ah ! how young 
he is ! Why does he in this tender age wear the 
knotted hair jof ascetics ? Look how reduced 
he looks by fasting ! ' but often their com- 
passion turned to admiration when Chaitanya 
spoke of God and wept in great love. At 

Gurjari he defeated a great 
soho?a™*' * ^ ^'^°" scholar named Arjuna after a 

long discussion and then stood 
up and cried aloud ' Oh my Krishna ! ' 

" The place at once turned as if into Baikuntha 
— the heaven of Vishnu. The air blew gently, the 
villagers came in large numbers. Hundreds of 
men stood surrounding him to listen, to Krishna's 
name recited by him. It appeared as if the 
very gods of heaven stood overhead to hear the 
name. A smell of lotus came flowing in the 
air. Chaitanya absorbed in poetic frenzy 
spoke of Krishna. All eyes were fixed on him 
and all eyes shed tears. The big Mahrattas 
came there and all heard the recitation of the 



204 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

liame. Behind them all I saw hundreds of 
women of noble families assembled, listening to 
him with devotional sentiments. The women 
were weeping and wiping away their tears by the 
edge of their sari. Many Vaishnabs and Shaiva 
ascetics stood on the spot listening to Chaitanya 
with closed eyes. By his religious instructions 
Chaitanya maddened the people of this country. 
I never saw such a wonderful sight. Sometimes 
Chaitanya spoke in Tamil and at others in 
Sanskrit." 

The story of the reformation^ of Chaitanya 

does not end here. In the Bhakta-Mal by Navaji, 

a Hindi writer, we find men- 

Baranmkhi, the harlot. , „ -,-, -, ■, . , . . i 

tion of Baramukhi a beautiful 
harlot. It is stated there that a Sadhu reformed 
her and she turned a Yaishnab saint. Navaji 
gathered his information about Baramukhi from 
the Deccan after Chaitanya's name had been 
forgotten there. So that the Bhakta-Mal does 
not give a full account. It is in the pages of 
Govinda Das's harcha that we find a graphic 
description of this reformation. I shall quote 
the account here. 

At a village named Ghoga near Dwaraka 
Chaitanya arrived, accompanied, of course, by 
Govinda Karmakar and' also by two other Bengalis 
who had met him in the way — Ramananda 
Basu and Govinda Charan Basu. To their great 
surprise and delight they had discovered 



BARAMTJKHl THE HARLOT 205 

Chaitanya in the shrine of Dwaraka which they 
had come to visit. 

" At Ghoga lived a harlot named Baramukhi. 
She was immensely rich. She had acquired this 
wealth by her bad livelihood. Her apparels and 
ornaments were like those of a princess and she 
lived in a large palatial house. She used to 
wander about her house and the adjoining garden 
with a view to tempt rich people. Her dress was 
like those of the women of Peshwar and she had 
many male and female servants. Attached to 
her residential building was the garden called 
Peyari-Teanan, Chaitanya came and sat near 
that garden and became totally lost in God's love. 
I had travelled with him in different countries so 
long but never did I see so much emotion in him. 
Ramananda and Govinda Charan stood on two 
sides and clapped their hands to keep time, as 
they sang the name of Krishna. There was a 
large pit near the road and Chaitanya fell into it 
in an unconscious state. A wicked man came 
there and began to abuse Chaitanya. He address- 
ed him and said ' Why have you come to deceive 
the simple villagers here ? You want to take 
money from them by feigning devotion to 
Krishna. I shall presently see what sort of 
sanyasi you are. I have seen many impostors 
like you.' When the wicked man spoke in this 
way, the villagers became excited and were about 
to give him a sound thrashing, but Chaitanya 



206 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE ' 

who had recovered himself, interceded on his 
behalf and said : ' Whom are you going to beat, 
brethren ? Here is one whose heart is dry, give 
him a bit of God's love. His mind has grown 
sterile without devotion. It is like a desert. 
Put in him that which may restore it to its 
natural fertility. ' Turning to the man he said : 
' Now, my pious brother,' will you come to me, 
I shall recite to you the name of Krishna and 
all your sorrows will be removed.' Saying so 
he went to him and began to sing the name of 
Krishna, 

"Baramukhi, the harlot, saw and heard all that 
happened from her window and said aloud ' What 
a cursed life I have been leading ! this young 
scmyasi appears to me like a god. I shall leave 
everything and go to him. He has no money with 
him yet my heart throbs with delight at the 
sight of him. How long shall I be in this house 
which is now a hell to me ? Will not this god 
be gracious unto me ? He has saved wicked 
Balaji from a sinful life, by what charm he 
knows best. I shall go to him and fall at his feet 
and will not leave him until he saves me.' 

"Erom the window of her mansion she 
uttered her reflections and people who heard her 
were pleased. They began to speak on this 
topic in an excited manner and laughed and 
set up a great uproar. A few moments after the 
harlot came down and Mira, her maid-servant, 



BARAMUKHI*S RENUNCIATION 207 

walked behind her. Baramukhi at this time 
said to Mira : ' I give you all the wealth that 
I have. You know I have immense riches 
but I long to-day to be a street-beggar.' Saying 
so, she opened her long tresses which fell down 
like clouds behind her figure, beautiful like a 
flash of lightning. The tresses fell a long way 
behind her back and Chaitanya closed his eyes. 
Her beauty was of a dazzling nature, and people 
stared at her face. She stood with joint hands 
before Ghaitanya and said again and again : 
' Save me, Sir, from the bonds of the world. I 
am a great sinner. If you do not show me 
mercy, what is the good of my bearing this 
cursed life ?' 

" And saying so she did not wait but cut off 
her long hair with her own hands. She put on 
a very humble dress and again came near 
Chaitanya and stood with joint hands before 
him. He said ' Make a garden, Baramukhi, of 
the sacred Tulsi plants here, and live devoting 
yourself to Krishna.' 

" ' You are my Krishna, you are my God,' said 
Baramukhi and fell at his feet. But Chaitanya 
moved a few steps as if to avoid a touch. People 
there admired the haCrlot and Mira, her maid- 
servant, began to cry aloud. She however with a 
smile addressed Mira and said, 'Listen to me, Mira, 
I give you all my wealth. If any guest comes 
to the house show hospitality as becomes a 



208 CHAlTANYA AND HlS ^Gt 

house-holder. Recite the name of Krishna day 
and night and do not live a sinful life. It 
is good to love, but not a deceitful man. Try 
to love Krishna.' Saying so she took a string 
of sacred beads in her hands and gave herself 
up to Krishna."^ 

The account of the Bhaktamal details how 
Baramukhi made a garden of Tulsi plants and 
lived a pious life, giving all her property to her 
maid servant. 



' Goyinda Das's Karcha pp. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

(i) Visit to Travaneore and other places. 
(m) Reception at Puri ; meeting with Raghunath Das. 



(*) Visit to Travaneore and other places. 

From Ghoga Chaitanya started for Somnath. 
The details of the tour are given in my work 
' Chaitanya and His Companions.' The karcha 
gives a topography of the shrines of South- 
ern India, graphic and full of vivid interest. 
We find how ' Chaitanya tried to avoid the 
big Rajas of the Deccan. Rudrapati, the King 
of Travaneore, sent a man asking Chaitanya 

Rudrapati, King of *« V^J ^ ^isit to him at his 

Travaneore. palace. On Chaitauya's refusal 

to do so the messenger threatened him with 
punishment. But when the Raja heard that the 
sam,ya8i would not come to him, he went him- 
self on bare foot and in humble dress, and Chai- 
tanya received him kindly. Another Raja 
came to see him and offered many presents 
which Chaitanya declined to accept. Upon 
which the Raja entreated him to accept from 
him some alms as he did from ordinary people. 
27 



210 CMAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

Chaitanya in compliance with the request sent 
Govinda to his palace who took only a handful 
of rice from the servants of the Kaja. The stern 
attitude of the scmyaai is in perfect accord with 
the account of his conduct towards Pratap 
Rudra, the Raja of Orissa as described in the 
Chaitanya Oharitamrita and other works. This 
also proves why the Brahmins of olden times 
were respected by the aristocracy of India. 
They were contented with poverty but were 
proud of their pure life and culture and never 
showed any sign of humiliation before those 
that had power and wealth. 

We have seen that Chaitanya held frequent 
learned debates with many of the reputed scho- 
lars of Southern India. But Govinda Das being 
himself a man of very humble education could 
not follow them. So he was naturally very 
brief in his description bf these. For instance, 
when Chaitanya meets Ram Ray, the minister 
of the king Pratap Rudra, on the banks of 
Godavari, Govinda Das gives only a very inade- 
quate gist of the learned conversation between 
- him and Chaitanya. He plainly tells us that 
not even a hundredth part of the conversation 
is reproduced in his book. But Chaitanya Cha- 
ritamrita gives us details of the discussion. 
Krishna Das Kaviraj, the author of the latter 
work, owed the details to the notes left by 
Sarup Damodara. 



AVANGAS OF TUKABAM 211 

Chaitanya started from Puri, as already stat- 
ed, on the 7th of Baisakh 14*32 Saka (1510 A.D.) 
we find it mentioned that he reatjhed Dwarak^ 
on the Aswin of the next year. Here he stayed 
15 days. He arrived at Alalnath in December, 
1511 A.D. 

The impression, that Chaitanya had made in 

the Decean lasted a long time. I stated in the 

course of my previous course of lectures that 

The ithpression made the statue of Haribola in the 

in soathern India. temple of Ramcswaram is in all 

probability that of ; Chaitanya. Professor D. R. 
Bhandarkar tells me that he has got two avangas:. 
of Tukaram in which that saintly poet says that 
Chaitanya appeared^ to him dn a dream. The 
womtgas have not yet been translated. But no 
research has been yet made in the fields of old^ 
Tamil and Maharatta literatures to ascertain, 
if; the mention of' Ghaitanya's tour occurs in 
any of them. < 

Chaitanya avoided self-glorifijcation of all 
sorts so that even Govinda took the notes "very 
privately" as he tells; us. It is noti probable thai 
the people of Southern India kept any informar 
tion about Chaitanya beyond the fact that he was 
a great Sadhu. For it is not thefcourtesy in India 
to enquire about anything relating to the life of i 
a Sadhu, previous to' his sanyas. But still if 
proper research be made, some traditions about 
him maybe found in the vernacular literatures, 



212 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

of the different countries that he had visited ; 
for there is no doubt that he had made a very 
great impression. 



(**) Return to Puri and the reception. 

When from B>issa Culla, the weary way- 
farers came to Alalnath after their long 
journey, the news spread all over the country in 
a few hours. The companions of Ohaitanya, not 
permitted to go with him as attendants, were 
awaiting his return with great eagerness. They 
all hastened to meet him. We find the party 
that marched from Puri to give him a reception 
headed by the lame scholar Khanjanacharya. 
Says Govinda Das " though lame he ran ahead 
of others." The veteran scholar Vasudev car- 
ried a drum himself and beat it with his own 
hands to indicate his joy. Murari Gupta came up 
in great haste and when Chaitanya embraced 
him, the old man overpowered with his emotion, 
knelt down. Ram Das, the famous musician, 
sounded the horn, Narahari, the saintly poet 
of Srikhanda, appeared with a flag in his hand. 
The famous singer Lakhan's voice was heard 
above all voices, for he sang sweet songs of recep- 
tion. Haridas, the Mahomedan convert, and 
Krishna Das, whose big belly was a noteworthy 
sight, came up in breathless haste, and hundreds 
of others followed, Some danced for joy and 



THE RECEPTION 213 

others sang. Says Govinda "The joy of this 
union cannot be expressed in words." They all 
began to sing the praises of Krishna, and in their 
midst was seen Ohaitanya with tearful eyes, 
beautifully moving his head in emotion, joining 
the singers. On the 3rd of Magh 1433 Saka 
(1511 A.D.) Ohaitanya reached Puri with these 
men. Thousands of men gathered to have a 
sight of him ; and Raja Pratap Rudra, throwing 
aside his royal pomp, joined the procession, and 
behind Ohaitanya and behind every one, like the 
humblest of his subjects, went on bare foot. 
Ohaitanya visited the temple of Puri and as he 
saw it he was absorbed in his love-ecstacy. Basu- 
dev Sarbabhauma says " There is the image of 
Vishnu in wood, lifeless, but you are living 
Vishnu " and Ohaitanya when he heard this ad- 
monished Vasudev saying "That is blasphemy, 
I am a common mortal, do not speak in that 
way." The account of Ohaitanya's return to 
Puri as we find in the karcha and that given 
in Ohaitanya Oharitamrita are very much alike. 
Many people had certainly witnessed it in Orissa, 
so that Krishna Das could easily gather correct 
historical information from direct sources. 

On his return to Puri Raghunath Das, that 
princely youth who had given 

BaghunathDae. ^^ j^.^ ^^^^ ^^^^^^ properties 

and turned an ascetic, met him. His income 
from landed estates was 12 lakhs of rupees a 



•214 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

year, and he enjoyed besides a further large 
income from taxes levied upon sea-going vessels 
and other sources. It should be remembered 
that the* value of money at that time was much 
higheri than now. When barelj 16s -he. had, ei'e 
this; once come to give himself up to Ghaitanya. 
But the latter had then said "Do not feign 
asceticism, it is not easy^ in your age to turn an 
ascetic. : You are a young boy; First go and do 
the duties of the world. But be not too much 
addicted to it. And when by discharging worldly 
duties you will be fit for renunciation^; then 
Krishna himself will show you the way." And 
Raghunath spoke not a word' but returned home 
to the great joy of his father Gobardhan Das and 
uncle Hiranya Das, — as he was the only heir to 
their joint estates at Saptagratn. Baghunath 
was dearer to them than all their riches. When 
the lost one was found, the joy of this return 
sounded throdgh the streets of their city by loud 
Nahabat! Orchestra. Raghunath had married 
one of the handsomest girls' in that part of the 
country. A' quarrel ensued soon after between 
his uncle and father on one side and Hussain 
Shah the Emperor on the other, and the result 
was thait the latter's troops attacked their palace 
at Saptagram. They had however absconded. 
Young Ragbiihath was fearless and came forward 
and was forthwith arrested. Though he was so 
highly religious he knew business tactics well. 



HAGHUNATH PAS 815 

When brought before the Emperor he cleverly 
managed affairs and an amicable settlement 
was the result. After doing bis duties to 
the letter, even as the Master had advised, for 
five or six years, Eaghunath again longed for 
joining Chaitanya. It was his course of pre- 
parations for the great renunciation which his 
parents had mistaken for worldliness. They were 
therefore alarmed to find Raghunath's growing 
tendencies towards ascetic's life again. He was 
kept continually under watch and several 
Brahmin scholars were appointed to teach him 
that there existed no higher duties than taking 
care of old parents and doing duties of the 
world by helping people in distress and the like. 
But Chaitanya's frenzied love for God and poetic 
life had a fascination which could not be over- 
come by such advice. And one day it was 
discovered that availing himself of a little 
relaxation on the part of the guards, young 
Eaghunath had made his escape. 

tUhaitanya had just returned to Puri. Eaghu- 
nath had walked on bare foot through jungles 
and woods to avoid detection ; for ten horsemen 
were behind him trying to trace him out. He 
fasted many a day. In the way he hardly found 
shelter to sleep in nights. After 12 days of 
great hardship he reached Puri. Chaitanya was 
then in the house of Kashi Misra, and Mukunda 
Datta recognised the youth from a distance and 



216 CHAITANYA AMD HIS AGH 

cried aloud " Look there Raghu, our beloved 
Baghu comes. How pale and imatiated does he 
look 1" And Raghu touched the feet of the 
Master with tears and said " Do not leave me 
this time." Ohaitanya appointed Sarupa Damo- 
dara to teach him Vaishnab scriptures. For a 
fuller account of Raghunath Das the reader is 
referred to my works ' Ohaitanya and his Com- 
panions.' 



CHAPTER IX. 

(t) Proposed visit to Brindaban. 

(ii) Interview with Rupa and Sanataa' — their samyas. 
(m) Private tour ; Baladev^s account. 
{iv) Stay at Brindaban ; on the way back, meeting 
with Bijali Khan. 



(i) Proposed visit to Brindaban. 

After a short stay at Puri Ohaitanya ex- 
pressed his wish to go to visit the Brinda groves, 
and Nrishinghananda, one of his admirers, became 
ready to devote his whole fortune towards making 
a road from Puj"i to Brindaban on this occasion. 

He built the road up to Kanai's 
NarlgZlnr'' "' Natsala near Gour, and Chai- 

tanya Oharitamrita gives a 
description of the magnificence of the plan. The 
road was well metalled and was paved with 
coloured stones and on both sides tanks were 
dug and rows of flower-trees were planted. 
When Chaitanya marched out flowers were spread 
on the way, so that the sani/asi could walk 
pleasantly on bare foot. Arrangements were 
made by Raja Pratap Rudra to keep record 
28 



•218 CHAITA.NYA AND HIS AGE 

of this trip. He sent three of his chief ministers, 
Mongoraj, Harichandan and Ram Ray with 
orders that every place where Ohaitanya would 
bathe might he turned into a shrine. A monu- 
ment should mark such spots. Owing to Raja 
Pratap Rudra's continued animosity with Hussain 
Shah the places beyond Pichilda, the limits of 
the jurisdiction of Uriya Raja, were very unsafe 
for the pilgrims who intended to travel beyond 
the boundary-line. The Mahomedan Governor 
appointed near Pichilda was, however, a great 
admirer of Chaitanya and he made friends with 
the ministers of Pratap Rudra and arranged 
every facility for the pilgrims. The road made 
by Nrishighananda was called Nrishinghananda's 
" Jangal " and may probably be still traced near 
Kanai's Natsala. A crowd of thousands of men 
followed Ohaitanya, but he, overjoyed at the 
thought of visiting the groves sacred by associa- 
tions with Krishna, heeded not these magnificent 
arrangements but went absorbed in his own 
thoughts. When he had come up to Ramkeli, 
Hussain Shah heard the report of the great crowd 
that attended the Scmyasi and sent one Keshab 
Basu to make enquiries as to what sort of 
scmyasi he was. The Emperor was evidently 
struck with the impression that Ohaitanya had 
created in the country and wondered how a poor 
Brahmin lad could command such a widespread 
influence as to be followed by thousands. 



HUSSAIN SHAH'S ATTITUDE 219 

(ii) Interview with Sanatan and Rupa — their 
Scmyas. 

It is stated in the Chaitanya Oharitamrita that 
the Emperor felt a genuine respect for Chaitanya, 
after what he had heard from Keshab Basu. 
But when Sanatan, the Prime Minister, inter- 
viewed Chaitanya at Ramkeli, he told the 
Master that it was not safe for him to stay there 
long. " This Mahomedan ruler," he said, " has 
broken numberless images of gods throughout 
the provinces of Bengal and Orissa and greatly 
oppressed the Hindus. It is true that at the 
present moment he seems to be favourably dis- 
posed towards you, but who knows when his good 
disposition will pass away yielding to despotism 
which is his element." And Sanatan further 
remarked that it was not becoming for a scmyasi 
as he was to go to visit a shrine with such a 
large number of men. Chaitanya who had not 
so long minded the external things around him 
was roused to a sense of his duty as an ascetic 
by this remark and expressed his desire to return 
to Puri. He came back to Puri but not without 
leaving an impression in Gour which bore great 
fruits later on in the cause of Vaishnavism. 
Sanatan and Kupa, one the Prime Minister and 
the other an assistant in the court of Hussain 
Shah, were formerly called by the Mahomedan 
names of Sakarmallik and Dabirkhas respectively, 



22SO CH AIT ANY A AND HIS AGE 

for they had practically given up their Hindu 
ways though they had been originally Brahmins, 
and adopted Mahomedan habits. The names of 
Sanatan and Rupa were given to the brothers 
by Chaitanya. Sanatan was a great Sanskrit 
and Persian scholar and Rupa afterwards became 
the foremost Sanskrit poet of Bengal of those 
days. 

Their visits to Chaitanya produced the usual 
efFect and the brothers saw in him what others 
had seen before. This sanyasi had actually fallen 
in love with God, hitherto beheved to be too 
high for human comprehension. They beheld 
with wondering love the beauty of his mystic 
trances and this fascination did not cease but 
grow with lapse of time. Rupa left the court, 
turned sanyasi and joined Chaitanya at Puri 
about the year 1516 AD. leaving a note for 
Sanatan his elder brother. This was in the form 
of a Sanskrit verse which may be thus rendered 
into English " Where is, alas, now Ayodhya, the 
the kingdom of Rama ? Its glories have vanish- 
ed and where is the reputed Mathura of Krishna ? 
It is also devoid of its former 
Rupa and Sanatan. splendour. Think of the fleet- 
ing nature of things and settle 
your course." The Prime Minister, however, could 
not so easily leave the capital as the Emperor 
kept him under watch after his brother had fled. 
He asked him to accompany him in his expedition 



SANATAN'S HUMILITY 221 

against a Hindu kingdom. But Sanatan plainly 
told the Emperor that he could not be a party to 
help iconoclasm, upon which the Emperor threw 
him into prison. But his relations bribed Mir 
Habul, the jailor, with Rupees 7,000 and helped his 
escape. He joined the Master at Puri. Ohaitanya 
sent both the brothers to Brindaban with the 
mission to identify places associated with Krishna 
and write books about Vaishnavism. There might 
have been a political reason for Chaitanya's send- 
ing the brothers away. If they lived at Puri, the 
hostilities between Prataprudra and Husain Shah 
might be renewed on this plea, as both the 
brothers had fled from Husain Shah's court and 
one had actually made his escape from prison 
after having bribed the Jailor. The manner in 
which Sanatan met Chaitanya, his great spiritual 
humility and the pathos of the situation have been 
vividly recorded in the pages of the Ohaitanya 
Charitamrita. He would not allow Chaitanya 
to touch his body afflicted with eczema. But 
Chaitanya embraced it saying that there was 
nothing so dear to him as that body in which a 
self-sacrificing spirit and love for God dwelt. 
Sanatan left the ordinary path leading to the 
temple and walked through the sun-burnt sands 
which scorched his feet. He had avoided the 
public road owing to the fact that the Pandas 
might object, as he had once adopted Mahomedan 
ways. When Chaitanya pointed to the burns on 



222 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

his toe, Sanatan said " I did not know or feel 
these, so overjoyed was I that Master had called 
me." And Chaitanya said " Even the very gods 
of heaven would be sanctified by a touch of 
yours. You are the holiest of the Brahmins that 
I have ever met, yet you did not despise the 
ordinary rules of the temple. This only shows 
your superior breeding and noble character." 
Chaitanya gave Sanatan instructions on Vaishnab 
religion and its tenets for a period of three 
months and these were elaborated and compiled 
by Sanatan in his magnas opus — the Haribhakti- 
Bilas, the highest authoritative work of juris- 
prudence with the Bengali Vaishnabs. Both 
the brothers, Sanatan and Rupa, went to Brinda- 
ban and settled there by the Master's command, 
and it is they who eventually raised the old 
shrine to such a great eminence. Formerly it 
was a pastoral village dotted here and there with 
cottages, but it now claims some of the most 
magnificent temples of India, and is one of the 
most splendid of her ancient cities. The resus- 
citation of the old shrine is due to the efforts 
of a few ascetics led by Sanatan and Rupa, who 
had no house to Live in, who slept under trees — 
and lived upon the scantiest of meals by begging, 
and wore rags. This noble renunciation which 
has marked them out as recurring types of 
the Buddha and Mahabir in Indian History, 
attracted millionaires who built temples to 



THE GREAT CROW 223 

commemorate the shrine. We thus fiad that 
the inspiration of Ohaitanya had a far-reaching 
effect in moulding the fortunes of the cities far 
remote from Bengal. 

(c) Private tour — Baladev^s account. 

After a short stay at Puri Chaitanya again 
planned a tour in Upper India mainly with the 
object of visiting Brindaban. He expressed 

his intention to a companion 
^_^Tour in Upper In- i^ t^ose words " Last time I had 

intended to go to the Brinda 
groves, but there was such an immense crowd 
that it was impossible for me to proceed after 
having gone some distance. . Wherever I stayed, 
people ascended the roofs of houses and tops 
of walls and it looked as if all the buildings 
would fall with a crash ; wherever I happened to 
glance I saw only the heads of men and women ; 
deserted paths were filled with teeming popula- 
tion, and this did not stop, but increased from 
day to day. It had been my object to visit the 
shrine alone but I looked like a Marshal or a 
Captain followed by a large army who beat 
drums to announce the visit. " 

This time he was resolved not to allow any 
such thing. The arrangement proposed by him 
was that when people would come, after he had 
left, as usual in the morning to see him, they 



224 CHAlTANYA AND HIS AGE 

should not be given any report of his departure 
from Puri for some time ; so that they might 
not hasten to overtake him on the way. He 
would allow no one to accompany him ; the 
entreaties of friends and followers were all in 
vain. One Baladev Bhattacharyya was already 
proceeding to Brindaban and the friends of 
Ohaitanya insisted on his taking him as com- 
panion. Ghaitanya after a protest acceded to 
this request. The matter was kept private for 
some time, according to his desire, so that the 
whole Puri was taken by surprise at the news 
of his departure of which they heard many days 
after Ghaitanya had left the city. A popular 
song thus describes him as a pilgrim to the 
famous shrine of the Vaishaabs : 

" Look how Ghaitanya goes to the Brinda 
groves! Look at his shaven head, the rag on his 
back and the beggar's bowl at his hand." 

Baladev's account is very inadequate. He 
did hot evidently take any note but tried to take 
his audience by surprise by narrating miracles 
about him. He also seizes every opportunity 
to emphasize the point that Ghaitanya was 
greatly pleased by the manner in which he 
offered his services to him. It pleased his 
vanity to say all these and this no doubt 
heightened his importance in the eyes of the 
Vaishnabs. He said that the plants and trees 
of the Brinda groves came near Ghaitanya to 



IN UPPER INDIA 235 

offer him their tributes of flowers and fruits 
and that even the tigers on the way recited the 
name of Krishna, when Chaitanya had bidden 
them to do so. Krishnadas Kaviraj, a devout 
Vaishnab and scholar, recorded these in spirit of 
implicit faith, nay, threatened the non-believers 
with imprecations. The contrast between 
Baladev's account recorded in the Charitamrita 
and what we find in the harcha of Govindadas is 
striking. One is mostly a fairy-tale and gib- 
berish and the other a simple and unassuming 
piece of history. But on this we need not dwell 
any more. 

One of the important facts in regard to 

Ohaitanya's tour in Upper India relates to in- 

s cideuts that happened at Benares. While in 

that city he put up with one Tapan Misra and 

later on stayed for some time at the house of 

Chandrasekhar, a Vaidya. The leader of the 

sanyasis at this time in that city 

was the far-famed scholar and 

saint Prakasananda. He was a son of Benkat 

Bhatta of Southern India and brother of Gopal 

Bhatta who latterly rose to eminence as one of 

the six Goswamis among the Gauriya Vaish- 

nabs. Like all Indian scholars of that age 

Prakasananda was a pantheist. One account 

says that he had suffered from leprosy for a 

time. It is recorded that one of his Mahratta. 

disciples paid a visit to Chaitanya and found the 

39 



226 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

Nadia- ascetic merged in the love of Krishna. 
Prakasananda's scholarship was equal to his 
pride and he did not like when his Mahratta 
pupil came to him and spoke eulogistically of 
the Nadia-sanyasi. His love for God was re- 
ported to be so great that it sanctified every 
man who beheld it, that his tears created pathos 
which were irresistible and taught men a love 
for God without a sermon. The disciple declared 
that he believed Chaitanya to be an Avatar of 
God. Prakasananda only sneeringly replied 
" He is an impostor ; I too have heard of him. 
I do not know what black art he knows, but he 
has certainly a power to hypnotise people as 
he seems to have done you. Benares, however, 
is a city of the learned ; here all these emotional 
nonsense will not do. Do not go to him again. 
Read the Upanishads carefully and leave the 
mad man alone." The Brahmin was sorry to 
hear Chaitanya abused in this way and reported 
all these to him. He, feeling how deeply the 
young scholar's feelings were wounded, said 
" I came to sell a little of the emotional sweet- 
ness with which my soul is charged, to the 
people of this city. But there is no purchaser 
here. The burden of my emotion oppresses me 
and fain would I sell it to you at whatever 
small price you would offer." 



VISITING THE SHRINES 22? 

(iv) Stay at Brindaban, — on his way back — 
meeting with Bijli Khan. 

Chaitanya felt immensely delighted with the 
forest-path through which he went. At Jhari- 
khanda he passed through a regular amphitheatre 

.^ ^^ ., , , of woodland scenes and was be- 

At Jharikhanda. 

side himself with joy. He 
danced in emotion and cried aloud ' Krishna' 
' Krishna,' while tears flowed down his cheeks that 
knew no bounds. He came to Allahabad and 
stayed there for a few days. On arrival at 
Mathura he stopped near Bisranti Ghat. Here he 
met a Sonoria Brahmin whose status in society 
was low but who was a disciple of Madhabendra 
Puri and had been initiated into the Bhakti cult 
by that famous apostle. Chaitanya paid him great 
respects. He visited the twenty-four landing 
ghats of the Jamuna, each of which was a great 
shrine of the Vaishnabs. He came next to the 
village of Arit and thence went to Annakut. He 
proceeded to a village named Gathuli and lived in 
Brindaban for some time. His religious ecstasies 
in this favoured place of the Vaishnabs knew no 
bounds. At the sight of the neck of a peacock, 
the bluish dark colour of which reminded him 
of Krishna, he fell senseless to the ground and 
for days together remained absolutely without 
any food whatever. Eor several days he did not 
talk with anybody. The rush of visitors 



228 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

became so great that it became almost uncon- 
trollable. Baladev Bhattacharya one day told 
the Master " These • people who cannot have 
an interview with you, as you 

Leaves Brindaban. «, . . , 

often remain m your trances, 
disturb me in such a manner that it is not pos- 
sible for me to stay here any longer. Every one 
comes to invite you and how can a thousand 
invitations be accepted every day ? The great 
Mela of the Sanyasis will take place at Allahabad 
on the 30th of Magh and let us go to visit it." 
It was probably the Kumbha Mela of the year 
1517. Chaitanya made no objection and being 
accompanied by Baladev Bhattacharya, a Rajput 
Chief named Krishna Das and three Brahmin 
admirers of Brindaban, started for that city. 
In the way a milkman was playing on his flute ; 
at the sound, Chaitanya began to tremble ; the 
memory of Krishna's flute became vivid and he 
swooned away. Ten horsemen headed by Bijli 
Khan, the son of a Pathan Nawab, came up 
there at this moment and suspecting that the 
five men had drugged the ascetic in order to rob 
him of his money, arrested them. Krishna Das, 

the Rajput, was a valorous man 

Krislina Das's en- 
counter with Bijli and was not to be cowed down. 

He threatened the Mahome- 

dans saying that he had an army behind him 

who would soon come up to teach proper lessons 

to them. When a hot discussion was going on, 



BIJLI KHAN 229 

Ohaitanya recovered his senses and said " Bre- 
thren, your suspicion is ungrounded, I am an 
ascetic and have no money to be robbed of. I 
am suit'ering from epilepsy and these friends have 
kindly attended me during my illness. Kindly 
release them." Attracted by the sweet courtesy 
and his exceedingly attractive manners, one of 
them who was a great scholar in Mahomedan 
theology entered into a discussion with Chaitanya 
who at once convinced him of the superiority of 
the bhahti cult. The eloquence and devotion 
with which all was said made a great impression, 
and Bijli Khan with his Mahomedan followers 
became converted into Vaishnab faith. 



CHAPTER X. 

(a) Chaitanya at Benares, discussion with Prakasa- 

nanda. 
(li) Tour in Bengal, 
(c) At Puri, 



(a) Chaitanya at Benares ; discusion with 
Frakasananda. 

At Allahabad, the confluence of the Ganges 
and the Jamuna, Chaitanya produced such a 
wonderful impression that Krishnadas Kaviraj 
remarks " The joint streams of the Ganges and 
the Jamuna could not plunge Allahabad, but the 
flood of Krishna's love brought by Chaitanya 
did it." At Allahabad Sanatan met Chaitanya 
and both stayed there for ten days. He returned 
to Benares and was received there by his two 
old friends Tapan Misra and Chandrasekhar. 
The Mahratta Brahmin, the pupil of Frakasa- 
nanda, also came up to meet him. He stayed this 
time at the house of Chandrasekhar where Sanatan 
also called on to pay. his respects. Chaitanya 
gave him further instructions about the hhakti- 
cult. These teachings occupy a long space of 
the Chaitanya Charitamrita. Then took place 



PRAKASANANDA CONVERTED 231 

the much expected controversial discussion 
which had been reserved during 
Priklaian"df" "'"' Chaitanya's last visit, between 
him and the great leader of the 
sanyasis of Benares, Prakasananda. This was of 
course relating to the respective merits of the 
pantheist school and that form of dualism in 
which bhakti is emphasized. The details of this 
discussion, it is said, were embodied in a work 
called the Panchatattyakhyan (Chaitanya Chari- 
tamritra, verse 8, p. 25) written by Krishnadas 
Kaviraj. This book seems to be lost. The 
author of the Chaitanya Charitamrita says that 
having once given particulars of this discussion 
in his Panchatattyakhyan he did not think it 
worth while to repeat the same in the Chari- 
tamrita ; but that he would only briefly refer to 
it in that book. So the particulars are not yet 
known ; but from what has been written in the 
Charitamrita we see that Chaitanya did not 
try to demolish pantheism as he had done 
in other places, as much as he tried here to 
establish the religion of Bhakti. Thus by elu- 
cidating and elaborating the texts of the Bhagbat 
Sk. 10, Ch. 14, verse 4, Sk. 10, 2, 26, Sk. 3, 10, 
3 and 4, Sk. 1, 5, 12, Sk. 6, 14, 4, Sk. 8, 1, 8, 
Sk. 2, 9, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, " Sk. 11, 2, 53, 
Sk. 11, 2, 43, Sk. 10, 30, 4, Sk. 1, 2, 11, Sk. 3, 
5, 23, and Sk. 11, 3, and 28 and those of other 
scriptures, he clearly established the superiority 



233 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

of the bhakii cult ; and Prakasananda who had 
so long scaled great intellectual heights and in 
his arrogance considered God and man to be 
identical, felt that a new fountain of soul was 
discovered from which sprang sweetness, resig- 
nation and love, capable of thoroughly spiri- 
tualising and sanctifying his life. And when 
at the end of his discourses Chaitanya wept for 
love of God, Prakasananda discovered in him 
a new man with a far deeper spiritual force and 
wider moral outlook than he could ever conceive 
it to be possible in a human being. The element 
of pedantry which had characterised young 
Chaitanya as a scholar of Nadia, though now 
thoroughly overcome by his spiritual humanity, 
showed itself, it is said on this occasion, in his 
startling interpretations of the verse 10, canto 7, 
of the first skanda of the Bhagavata, which 
he is said to have explained in 61 different 
ways. The difference in the present case became 
apparent in the fact that his speech was 
not only divested from all arrogant manners 
of a young pedant, but was also sweetly 
chastened by emotion and was full of spiritual 
felicities that made the deepest impression. 
So great was the effect of Prakasananda's 
acceptance of Chaitanya as his Guru that 
all Benares and its neighbouring localities 
gathered to have a sight of the divine man. 
" When Chaitanya went to visit the temple of 



CONFLICTING ACCOtJNTS 233 

Bishwanath," says Charitamrita, " immense 
crowds gathered on both sides of the road to have 
a glimpse of his face." When Chaitanya sobbed 
for Krishna and called Him aloud in a voice 
choked vrith tears, the people shouted ' Krishna ' 
' Krishna,' with tearful eyes, so that the whole 
atmosphere, as it were, rang with Krishna's 
name. 

(b) Tour in Bengal. 

On his return to Puri Chaitanya is said to have 
again made a trip to Bengal. 
of this to^.^ ^''°°^^ ^ Jayananda says that during this 
tour he visited Kulia, staying 
at Barokona ghat near Nadia, where his mother 
Sachi Devi had again an opportunity of seeing 
him. He paid a flying visit to Kumarhatta and 
stayed for a short while at the residence of Sribas. 
He also met there Bashudev Datta, son of 
Mukunda Sanjay, at whose house, it should be 
remembered, Chaitanya used to hold his tol at 
Nadia. From Kumarhatta he came to Panihati 
where he was a guest of Raghab Pandit. He 
next visited Baranagar near Calcutta, where his 
sandals are still preserved in the temple erected 
by Bhagavatacharya. I am not, however, 
quite sure of chronological accuracy in regard 
to these trips. Most of the biographers seem to 
suggest that Chaitanya had paid a visit to 
the above villages on his way back from 
30 



284, CHAITANYA AMD HIS AGE 

Ramkeli, before he had started for Brindaban 
a second time. But Govinda Das, who was 
with him, says nothing about his visit to 
these villages. This makes it doubtful if 
Chaitanya had ever visited them before he 
returned from Southern India, But I have 
already stated that Govinda Das's account of 
the brief period before Chaitanya started for the 
Deccan is neither perfect nor given in detail. 
Hence with some hesitancy we are inclined to 
credit the account of the other biographers on 
this point. 

(c) At Puri. 

His tour in the Deccan and in the Upper 
India altogether took six years 

Or^sa!'**^" '^^^^ '" '^^^ he spent the remaining 18 
years of his life at Puri. He 

became a mnyasi on the completion of the 24th 

year and passed away from this world in his 

48th year— in 1533 A.D. 

It appears that King Pratap Rudra used to 

appoint reporters wherever Chaitanya travelled. 

Kavikarnapur says that one Mallabhatta, the 

court Pandit of Raja of Karnat, had reported 
to Pratap Rudra the details 

Reporters appointed a r\\ •!. ) j. • ii 

by Pratap Rudra. of Chaitanya s tour in the 

Deccan. The reporters are also 

observed to give the Raja details in regard 

to the doings of Chaitanya and some of his 



A PROBABLE SOURCE 235 

followers at Pari. We find several Brahmin 
reporters bringing to the Raja information about 
Chaitanya's interview with Ram Rai on the 
banks of Godavari. Prom incidental references 
of this nature I have firm conviction that 
Chaitanya's life, especially that of the long 18 
years that he had spent at Pari, was preserved 
in State papers in the Uriya language by the 
order of Pratap Rudra. For that monarch and 
his chief queen Chandrakala, daughter of She- 
khara, were the staunchest followers of Chai- 
tanya and interested themselves profoundly in 
every act of the Master. After Chaitanya had 
passed away, we have it on the authority of 
Kavikarnapur, that on an occasion of the great 
Cart festival of Jagannath (sometime after 
1533 A.D.) the Raja saw the immense gathering 
at Puri from the terrace of his palace and sadly 
reflected that everything looked void and un- 
meaning to him, when the great personality of 
Chaitanya — the living fountain of faith that had 
so long inspired such gatherings — was no longer 
there to gladden his eyes. Kavikarnapur was 
commanded to write a drama on Chaitanya to 
give some consolation to the Raja in his great 
grief. Once every year the Puri Raja, with a 
golden broom in his hand cleansed the temple 
of Jagannath according to an old custom, and 
one of the biographers says that after Chaitanya's 
passing away, the Raja, while discharging this 



236 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

function, could not suppress his tears in recollec- 
tion of Chaitanya. From all these evidences of 
his great love for the Master and the incidental 
references to his appointing reporters to record 
the incidents ahout him, .1 am almost certain 
that if the old papers and documents of the 
palace are searched, important hiographical 
sketch of the Master may still be recovered. 
Babu Suprakash Ganguli, a grandson of Maharsi 
Debendranath Tagore, tells me that he had pur- 
chased a large Uriya MS. in six volumes, con- 
taining Chaitanya's life, for Rs. 125 from a 
Panda of the Puri temple and sold it almost 
immediately after to an American tourist for 
Rs. 1,200. We have Rajas and Maharajas 
whose munificence in the cause of Vaishnab 
religion is well known in this province. Sur- 
rounded by Uriya scholars and Uriya king's 
chief ofl&cers, Chaitanya had lived 18 years of his 
life in the Uriya country where admiration for 
him is still so great that his images are worship- 
ped in almost every important village. But 
though popular regard for Chaitanya is great 
everywhere, no one has ever thought it fit to 
ransack the store of old Uriya MSS. and find out 
what facts about the life of the Master might 
be found from that very probable source. The 
poet-laureate of Pratap Rudra's court was Bani- 
pati. Surely if his verses are still extant, some 
of them may be found to contain hymns and 



AT PURI 237 

adulatory lyrics in honour of Chaitanya. TVe 
call upon the aristocracy of Bengal to found 
research scolarships for initiating historical 
investigations in this very important field. Not 
only Banipati, but other contemporary poets 
and writers might have, it is presumed, something 
to say about the inspiring personality of the 
Master. B,upa and Sanatan saw Chaitanya 
occasionally as they had made Vrindaban their 
permanent home. The Bengali admirers and 
friends of Chaitanya came to visit him at Puri 
for some short months of the rainy season, so 
the sources availed of by Krishnadas are not at all 
of an exhaustive nature. It is in the Uriya 
books and records that we may naturally expect 
to find far larger materials about the epoch 
of Master's life spent at Puri. 

On his return to Puri we find Chaitanya 
literally merged in love-ecstasies. When he 
went to see the sacred images in the Puri 
temple, he became so overpowered with emotion 
that he could not control himself. Sometimes 
he ran to the very pedestal, to embrace the 
images. Coming to his senses — he regretted his 
conduct and made it a point not to enter the 
temple. He stood resting his elbow on the 
Garur pillar at the gate of the 

The Gadura-Pillar. m i j j.u i 

Temple and saw through eyes 
overflowing with tears the images from afar, lost 
to aril other sights or things of the world. 



238 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

The mark caused by his elbow, which touched 
the pillar every day, for a period extending over 
18 years, is still to be seen. Many incidents 
of this period of Chaitanya's life are relat- 
ed in the Ohaitanya Charitamrita and in 
these we find exhaustive notes on some of 
his followers such as Rupa, Sanatan and 
E/aghunath Das. These I have detailed in my 
work called " Chaitanya and 

Lalifc Madhava and i • /-< • jj i t i 

Bidagdha Madhava. "IS Companions and I need 
not repeat them here. We 
find Chaitanya greatly admiring Bidagdha 
Madhava and Lalit Madhava, two Sanskrit dramas 
written by Rupa, the inspiration of which had 
come from Chaitanya himself, — the famous sloka 
in one of these works beginning with " Tunde 
tandabini," etc., being specially appreciated. 
These dramas were held in great admiration by 
all Vaishnabs specially by Ram Ray, the author 
of Jagannath Ballava in Sanskrit, who was 
himself a great dramatist. About this time we 
find a poet of Eastern Bengal who had written 
a Sanskrit drama on Chaitanya, paying a visit 
to Puri and getting himself introduced to the 
Master by one of his followers Bhagaban 
Acharya. The young poet was very willing that 
the Master would listen to a recitation of his 
work. But Chaitanya declined to do so on the 
plea that he was not the proper critic, evidently 
avoiding to hear his own eulogies. On the 



BALLAVA BHATTA 239 

persistent entreaties of tke poet, Ohaitanya's 
companion Swarupa Damodara 

Some distinguished i j .1 p ji i 

visitors fail in the iieard the verses of the drama 
visftl^ ° ^" I'lit found many rhetorical 

flaws in the work. Another 
man Ballava Bhatta, the renowned leader of the 
sect that goes by his name, came to pay res- 
pects to Chaitanya. Though holding him in 
high admiration Ballava had little regard for his 
companions. But Chaitanya said in reply to the 
eulogies with which Ballava had accosted him, 
" Sir, your praises are misplaced, for I am an 
ascetic devoid of any love for God. My esteem- 
ed friend Adwaitacharya, learned in all the 
branches of human knowledge, has fertilized my 
heart by infusing into it a bit of his great love. 
There is Nityananda whose mind is an ocean of 
spiritual felicities, and Bashudev Sarbabhauraa 
jvho knows the six schools of philosophy as few 
know them in India. These truly saintly men 
have taught me the little devotion to Krishna 
that people find in me. Eamananda Eay knows 
the niceties of spiritual emotion to an extent 
which is my constant joy to hear, and Damo- 
dara Swarupa is a living fountain from whom 
spiritual sweetness ever flows. Besides these 
men, there are Jagadananda Bakreshwar, Kasi- 
shwar, Mukunda, Bashudev, Murari and others 
whose saintly company has helped me to 
acquire a little faith which has attracted you 



240 CHAITANYA AND HlS AGE 

to visit me." Ballava had thought that there 
was none at Puri with him he could discourse 
on religion except Chaitanya for whom he had 
of course a high regard. He however, did not 
much relish the words of Chaitanya, but for the 
sake of courtesy asked where these worthies could 
be interviewed. Chaitanya said " They are all here 
now to see the Car festivities." Ballava invited 
them all to his house and was struck by their great 
devotion and scholarship. During Rathajatra 
seven great parties marched to hold Kirtcma 
in the public streets. Sribas, Mukunda, 
Govinda Ghosh and three others led six of 
them, Chaitanya himself, accompanied by 
Nityananda, leading the main party. The joy 
of the procession was great, and the more did 
Ballava see of Chaitanya the more was he 
convinced of his divinity. Ballava had written 
a commentary on the Bhagavata and had an 
ardent desire that the Master would see it. 
But Chaitanya said that he was not fit to listen 
to a discourse on the Bhagavata, as that scrip- 
ture was too high for his comprehension ; the 
two letters ^^ he says were a fascination to him 
and beyond this he needed no expansion of the 
religious idea. Then Ballava said that he had 
elaborately interpreted the two letters explain- 
ing the religious import they carried. But 
Chaitanya told him that to him the word 
was enough and it meant a simple thing and 



BALLAVACHARYA 24,1 

further interpretations would only cloud his 
faith. The truth is that Ballava had found 
fault with the established commentary on the 
Bhagavata by Sridhar Swami, and Chaitanya 
had already heard of this. He did not like to hear 
any one blaspheming the saintly commentator; 
and hence he tried to avoid Ballava Bhatta. 
But when one day Ballava vaunted before him 
that he had rejected the Swami (lit. husband) 
Chaitanya is said to have made a pun on the word 
and said " How can one be called true who has 
rejected the Swami ?" BallavA was very sorry at 
being treated with indifference by the Master and 
wondered why Chaitanya had changed his atti- 
tude towards him ; for thought he " When I had 
first seen him at Allahabad he had received me 
very kindly." Coming home he reflected on this 
again till suddenly he felt that it had been very 
wrong on his part to discard Sridhar's comment- 
ary. Sridhar Swami was the prince of Bhaga- 
vata commentators and a saintly man ; whereas 
he proceeded to establish his points being 
guided by pride alone. " This pride," he thought, 
" must be given up," and the next day when he 
met Chaitanya again, the Master received him 
with more tlian usual kindness, for he had mark- 
ed in his remorseful looks that true spiritual 
humility had dawned on him in the place of the 
haughtiness and pride of mere scholstfthip. 
" Ballava Bhatta, " says Charitamrita, " was a 

31 



242 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

worshipper of Bala Gopal — child-Krishna. He 
practically changed his views in respect of 
Vaishnavism by the teachings of Jagadananda; 
a "young scholar and admirer of Chaitanya."^ 
This account of Ballava Bhatta is to be found 
in the Charitamrita and must be substantially 
correct, but as Ballava is the reputed leader of 
another sect of Vaishnavas, and though; a 
contemporary of Chaitanya had not accepted 
the latter's form of faith but founded a new 
school, we must await a scrutinising enquiry into 
the literature of his school before accepting"^ 
toto the account of the Charitamrita. ' 

We find in the old Assamese literature 
frequent references to the Vaisnava apostk 
Sankara interviewing Chaitanya. There are 
clear evidences of the great influence which 
Chaitanya exerted on the great Vaishnav saint 
of Assam of the 16th century. 

At Puri occurred that melancholy incident 

causing junior Haridas to leave the city arid drowifl 

himself at the confluence of the 

The tragic end of •, . i ti i -i- i 

junior Haridas. sacrcd rivcrs near Allahabad. 
Chaitq,nya had heard that this 
young ascetic had begged alms from Madhabi, an 
accomplished woman and a sister of Sikhi Mahiti, 
who was a copyist in the king's court. The 
Master said, ".Being a sanyasi he interviews a 
worfen, I cannot bear to see his face *' and he 
»ever allowed him to come near him, Earn Kay 



JUNIOR HARIDAS 243 

the great friend of Chaitanya, used to Mve his 
dramas played by women and directed their re- 
hearsal himself. Nityananda had two wives. 
But Chaitanya had never objected to this. He 
was, however, cruelly hard upon junior Haridas. 
The reason seems to be that this young ascetic 
who had a sweet musical voice had not yet 
extinguished his sexual desires, though he 
had taken the vows of asceticism, and this 
Chaitanya knew well; whereas in regard to 
the worthies mentioned above, he knew them to 
be men of approved character and saintliness, 
about whom he had not the least shadow of 
doubt. This accounts for the difference in 
treatment referred to here. Junior Haridas 
tried in vain ^o soften the attitude of Chaitanya, 
but failing, drowned himself in the Jamuna near 
Allahabad where he had gone for penance. The 
supernatural tale about this man, full of pathe- 
tic interest^ related in the Charitamrita, has 
been reproduced by me in my work "Chait- 
anya and his Companions. " 

The people of Nadia and the neighbouring 

localities had the Master's permission for coming 

„^.^ y „ to Puri and staying there for 

Shibananda Sen. •' ° 

. "■ four months of the rainy season, 

■r— all except Chaitanya's poor mother, wife 
and Nityananda. But Nityananda paid little 
heeti to the order of Chaitanya and came often 
toPiritosee him. The leader of the party 



, Adwaita's change of 
views. 



244 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

from Nadia was that veteran Vaishnata 
Sibananda Sen, who knew all the paths and 
was rich enough to bear expenses of those who 
had not the means. Sibananda was an inhabi- 
tant of Kanchrapara near Naihati, and his son 
Paramananda Sen who is generally known by his 
title of Kavikarnapur, is the author of the cele- 
brated drama Chaitanya Chandrodaya and other 
works in Sanskrit. 

It appears that about the year 1520 A.D. 
sometime after Chaitanya's return to Puri after 
his tour in Upper India, a few 
pilgrims from Bengal reported 
to him that Adwaita had eschew- 
ed the bhakti cult and reverted to that of jnan 
and was busy explaining the five-fold paths of 
emancipation from desires (Mukti) according to 
pantheistic views propounded by Sankara and 
other leaders of that school. Chaitanya did not 
put much faith in the reports of the people which 
he took for mere story. Then came a letter 
from Nityananda himself, saying "Adwaita-; 
eharya has given up the bhakti cult and is 
explaining the tenets of non-dualislic belief. " 
A great discussion took place at Puri amongst 
Ram Ray, Gopinath Acharya and Bashudev 
Sarbabhauma as to the course to be adopted for 
preventing the veteran leader of Vaishnava from 
the mischievous course he had been following. 
They all expressed themselves against him in 



SUSPICION ABOUT ADWAITA 245 

a somewhat free language. But Chaitanya^ 
when he heard their speeches, made light of the 
whole thing and said with a smile " I am afraid 
it is a mere trick on the part of A.dwaitacharya 
to pursuade me to visit Bengal once more. 'For 
somehow or other he has conceived the notion 
that when the interests of the bhakti religion will 
he at stake, I shall not be able to sit quiet at 
Puri like a mere looker-on. Adwaita who is mine 
in every respect regrets my aanyas and desertion 
of home more than any one else." The scholars 
of Puri, however, headed by Ram Ray, sought 
divine grace in the Puri temple for safeguarding 
the interests of Yaishnava religion and the High 
Priest came up with reassuring looks, saying 
that the cause of Vaishnavism would flourish 
for ever ; as a sign of divine blessings he presented 
a garland of flowers, 21 feet long, from the 
Temple, and in the meantime a reply came from 
Adwaitacharya himself to whom Chaitanya 
had written a letter. It said in a sort of 
enigmatic language like the Sandhya bhasa — in 
which conversations were sometimes carried on 
amongst Chaitanya, Nityananda and Adwaita, 
that everything was right and that even Nitya- 
nanda had misunderstood him. The letter further 
assured that it was impossible for Adwaita- 
charya to swerve an inch from his loyalty to 
Chaitanya. That a sort of quarrel on some minor 
points of religion had arisen between Adwaita 



^46 CHAlTANtA AND HIS AGE : 

and: Mtyananda, is hinted by Brindaban Das^ 
hiihself in many places of his work, su'bstan- 
fiating the statement of the Prembilas from 
which we have taken the above account. 

Kavikarnapur says, what is reproduced 
.:,' . by some of the later biogra* 

teSy SarTawfaum"!' phers, that Sarvabhauma had 
.'.',■ written two verses in honour 

of Chaitanya Dev and entrusted them . to 
Mukunda Datta to he shown to the Master. But' 
the latter tore off the verses. Only a portion of 
the torn paper could be recovered by Miikunda, 
and the Charitamrita quotes the portion and 
remarks in a language of flourish' that the high 
quality of the verse was like the trumpet-sound 
of victory announcing Bashudev's unparalleled 
poetic talents. 

Ramananda B/ay, the poet and dramatist, and 
a great -friend of Chaitanya, had four brothers. 
One of them , was Gopinath Bay — a feudatory 
chief under Pratap Rudra. Their father Bani- 
nath was still living. Gopinath Bay was in 
. . arrears of rent to the Uriya king 

(Jopinath's trouble. ^^ ^^^ ^^^^^^ ^^^^ 200,000. 

But as he was financially embarassed he made 
an application to the king stating that he had a 
latge number of horses in his stable and that 
His Majesty might be pleased to take some of 
the; best horses in lieu of money, after having 
settled their price by an expert. The kiJag 



CHANGE' CHAR A'NA 24^ 

requested a friend of his, a prince of a neighbour- 
ing country, who had expert knowledge in respect 
of the price of horses, to go and settle the matter 
on his behalf. This yoiing man had a peculiar 
mannerism ; he used to turn his neck and stare, 
at the sky in the midst of his speech every tiirie' 
that he spoke. This prince under- valued the 
horses in his zeal to serve the interest of his 
friend, *he TJriya king. Gopinath was greatly' 
offended with him for having thus under- valued 
his horses and said in a rude manner "My horses 
do not turn their necks and stare at the sky^ 
why should they be priced so low ? " The pririe^ 
naturally took umbrage at this insulting refer- 
ence to himself and spoke against Gopinath to 
Pratap Eudra and convinced him that the" 
object of that chief was to defraud the Rajifei 
of his just revenue. Pratap Rudra, highly in- 
censed at this report, ordered an arrest of thei 
whole family, and even old Banihath was ti6t 
spared, Gopinath was ordered to be punfshe^ 
with death by a process called the " Change 
Charana." The exact nature of this bapicsl 
punishment is not known, but from^ the aCGoWiit^ 
of Charitamrita and other books we have a' 
rough idea of it. The offender was raised- 
to a high place prepared with bamboo sticks? 
and thrown down upon a spot • wherfeS 
unsheathed swords were kept ready to receivisl 
him. ;! '■ '-'' '- ■ ■ •'■ ^' -■" ^-- 



U& CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

At this crisis all the friends of Ram Ray 
who were also Chaitanya's followers, headed by 
Swarupa, applied to Chaitanya requesting him to 
speak to the king in their behalf. They justly 
pleaded that the family of Baninath were all 
deeply attached to the Master, and that they 
should be saved by all means from the great 
danger. One man came at this stage to inform 
Chaitanya that Gopinath was about to be» carried 
away by king's men to be put on the Chang. 

Chaitanya regretted the incident, but sorrow- 
fully remarked " It is for this reason that I did 
not like to come in touch with the king. As an 
ascetic I can beg only five gandas of kowri (a 
little above one pie) and not more. How can I 
ask the Raja to remit Rs. 200,000 ? It is not 
for me to meddle in matters of State. I am very 
sorry for Baninath, ask him to seek the aid of 
God. Tor me I should not henceforth be near 
the Raja and must at once start for Alalnath, for 
these sorrows of worldly men pain me, though I. 
find no means of remedy." He made himself 
ready for leaving Puri, The king had already 
withdrawn the order of capital punishment that 
was on Gopinath by the intercession of his 
minister Hari Chandan, and when he heard that 
Chaitanya was leaving Puri, he sent word that 
should the Master take such a step he would 
give up his royal throne and follow him. 
He said that he had no knowledge of the 



HARIDAS ^49 

punishment ; it was passed by his officers. He fiot 
only cancelled the order of capital punishment on 
Gopinath but remitted him the outstanding dues 
ot Ks. 200j000 and moreover made him a grant of 
a Jaigir. Chaitanya had never asked for these, 
nay, he had declined to beg any favour of any 
one. But the Raja did all these to please him. 
It was about the year 1530 that Haridas, the 
Mahomedan convert to Vaishna- 

The death of Haridas. . , .i i i . i , y^i . 

vism, breathed his last. Chai- 
tanya had the highest respect for him, and he 
held Chaitanya to be his God, Chaitanya had 
once told him " I have marked that you bless 
those who assault you and pray for them. Your 
thoughts have ever been as holy as the Ganges. 
All your acts have in themselves a sanctity as if 
they were the rites of a great religion. Your 
ideas have the grandeur of Vedic hymns. What 
Sadhu or Brahmin is there who may be com- 
pared with you ?" To which Sanatan had added 
" There are people who preach religious truths 
but do not live them ; others there are who lead 
pure life without caring for the good of others ; 
but you have preached the truths and practised 
them in life." When Haridas's last moment 
came, he looked at Chaitanya and said that all 
his spiritual inspiration, whatever their worth 
might be, had come from the Master, and that it 
was his greatest joy to pass away from the 
world in sight of the Master. Chaitanya 

82 



250 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

made all pi^esent there touch the feet of the 
great saint; and good Brahmins and ascetics did 
so at his bidding. Though Haridas had origi- 
nally been a Mahomedan, Chaitanya and his 
men carried his body to the sea-shore where 
Chaitanya himself was the first to help in digging 
a grave for his burial. 



CHAPTER XI. 

(a) Reveries and ecstacies gradually increasing. 

(b) His passing away. 

The last part of the Chaitanya Charitamrita 
bristles with incidents like these, 

The last chapters j j. • j- ^i xi 

of the Charitamrita. and not infrequently are the 
theological discourses full of 
learned quotations and references introduced. 
In these accounts we surely catch occasional 
glimpses of Chaitanya's spiritual nature which 
appears to us like a full-blown flower, but 
towards the close of this book specially, the 
theological element and scholarship generally 
speaking preponderate in the pages of Krishna- 
das. As I have already stated this great work 
on Chaitanya belongs to a school of Vaishnava 
philosophy with complicated theological ideas 
which sometimes fail to interest us, — lay men 
that we are. But however much Chaitanya 
might have been appreciated by learned men, he 
had a side in his character which created a storm 
of popular admiration wherever he went and 



252 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

this side of his character we find more vividly 
portrayed by Govinda Das than any other bio- 
grapher, though judging as a whole, the Oharita- 
mrita must always be considered as one of the 
world's greatest books of theology. 

The incidents described above, relate however 
to points of minor interest : — the real man 
Chaitanya was absorbed in God's love night and 

Fine frenzy of the ^^J' ^^ ^^^ ^^S^*« particularly 

lov^er. " the pain of God" distressed 

him greatly. He sometimes saw Krishna come 
to his embrace and at others missed him, and in 
that stage he cried and wept like a bereaved 
soul. He spent the whole night hearing the 
songs of Ghandidas, Bidyapati, Jaydev and 
Billamangal, sung to him by Swarupa. At every 
stage he interpreted the songs in a charming 
manner, elaborating the sweet appeals and 
messages that they bore to a man's soul of a love 
of the infinite. He read the 10th skanda of 
the Bhagavata and those passages of it particu- 
larly where the milkmaids, distracted by 
Krishna's love, prayed to ktmda, juthi and other 
flower-plants to give them tidings of Him. 
Chaitanya's tears fell incessantly on the pages 
of the Bhagavata spoiling its letters, and this 
copy was for a long time with Bhagavat 
'Acharya who showed it, according to Prema- 
bilas, to Srinibas about the year 1600 A.D. 
Sometimes Swarupa sang and the Master danced 



JAIDEY'S SONGS 253 

and wept, unmindful of his physical exhaustion, 
for famished with fast and vigil, he had become 
very weak. For hours together he danced and 
wept in this way, and Swarupa would sing 
no more, feeling that the excitement would 
prove too severe a strain on the nerves of 
Chaitanya ; but with solicitous eyes full of tears, 
Chaitanya would beg him to go on. One day 
Swarupa sang the famous song of Jaydev 
beginning with 

and Chaitanya fell unconscious on the ground as 
he heard it. 

During the last two years these love-estacies 
came upon him so often that the emaciated body 
could bear them no more. One day a female 
musician attached to the Puri temple — a Seva 
Dasi — was singing a song of Jaydev in that sweet 
musical mode called the Gurjari Bag. At this 
time Chaitanya heard it from a distance and 
knew not whether a man or a woman sang the 
song. He ran with open arms to embrace, the 
singer through briers and thorns that pierced 
his feet. Govinda overtook aud caught him in 
the midway, and he was roused from his dream 
by the attendant's voice saying aloud " It is a 
woman that is singing." And Chaitanya thanked . 
him for saving him from touching a woman. 



^54 CHAITANYA AND HIS AG^ 

The fits of unconsciousness came often and some- 
times he was taken as dead ; but constant 
recitation of the name of Krishna by his friends 
brought him back to his senses; and he said on 
one occasion on thus coming back to himself 
"Ah friends, I was with Krishna, why have 
you disturbed the sweet union?" His body 
became so reduced that the hard floor whereon 
he slept pained him and Jagadananda brought 
a pillow for his head. The stern element of 
asceticism, however, never forsook him, and he 
reprimanded Jagadananda for having brought 
the pillow which he called a luxury, not to be 
enjoyed by an ascetic. And Jagadananda was 
so sorry at seeing his condition that he considered 
it prudent to leave Puri ; for thought he, it 
would pain him very much to see the end of 
Ohaitanya which every one felt was imminent. 
He accordingly left Puri with the permission of 
the Master and stayed at Brindaban for some 
time. There he met Sanatan, Rupa and others, 
but was unable inspite of himself to stay long 
without seeing Ohaitanya. He came back to 
Puri after a short sojourn. Meantime Ohaitanya 
had grown even more restless ; the verses of the 
Bhagavata continually supplied inspiration to 
him and stole away sleep from his eyes, night and 
day. The clouds brought on trances by their dark 
blue colour which reminded him of Krishna. 
'Ke fainted at the sight of the lightning 



THE FINE FRENZY 255 

which he mistook for the bright purple robe 
of the Lord. The chirp of birds was continually, 
mistaken for the sound of flute, and he thought 
that Some one called him to His embrace by the 
sweet music. The cranes flew in the dark-blue 
sky in flocks looking small from a distance, and 
Chaitanya thought them to be a string of pearls 
decorating the breast of his dark blue god. At 
the sight of every hillock he fell into a trance, 
reminded of the Gobardhan hills where Krishna 
had sported, and every river showed him the 
ripples of the Jamuna on the banks of which 
the pastoral god had played with his fello^ 
cowherds. The flowers reminded him of the 
beauties of Krishna's eyes and he wtept when he 
touched them, reminded of the divine touch, 
soft and sweet. Sometimes the smell of flowers 
emanating from the Puri temple kept him fixed 
to the spot like a picture ; he thought that his 
Krishna was approaching and the scent of a 
thousand flowers announced his approach, and 
he trembled in deep emotion with tearfuLeyes 
and passed into a trance. 

The rush of people to drink his pddodah 
(water touched by his feet) became so great that 
he had to hide himself whenever he went to visit 
the Puri temple. The place he had selected was 
a corner of the temple to the north of the Lion- 
Gate behind one of the doors. The place was 
over-shadowed by a large Nim tree and called 



256 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

Baid Pashara. The idea of being deified and 
allowing people to drink water touched by his 
feet was repugnant to him and he had given 
strict order to Govinda not to allow any body to 
go where he bathed. We find one Brahmin 
stealing into that nook and drinking the padodak 
Without his knowledge. Ohaitanya was much 
annoyed with him when he discovered the trick. 
. At night his reveries and trances grew more 
and more till he lost all control over himself. He 
left his bed and sought for Krishna in the flower- 
garden during his trances ; and one night his 
followers found him out lying in an unconscious 
state near the Lion-Gate. Another night towards 
its end he w^s discovered in the cow-shed attached 
to the Temple. On recovering his senses he 
wondered as to how he had come there. We 
find from the records that he spent nine days in 
the flower-garden called the Jagannath Ballava,^ 
and frequently bathed in the tanks called the 
Narendra Sarobara and the Indradyumna Saro- 
bara. He lived for sometime in the Gundicha. 

Towards the close of. his earthly career we 
find him maddened by the passages of the Bhaga- 
vata describing the sorrows of the milkmaids 
pafted from Krishna, and to this a reference 
has already been made. He passed into trances 
as he interpreted the verses to Swarupa and 
Ramananda B,ay who were his constant attend- 
ants at this stage. A Brahmin named Sankara 



THE End ^p7 

was appointed to keep watch over him at nigl^ts 

^o that he might not leave his room in a|i 

unconscious state. But one night he stole away 

from his chamber and came to the sea-shore, 

and delighted with the colour of the dark blue 

waters jumped into the sea, thinking that,hjB 

ran into the embrace of Krishna or into the 

waters of the Jamuna, the favourite resort of 

his dark blue God. One fisherman who used to 

catch fish towards the close of every night by 

net, caught him up and brought him to the 

shore. Meantime Swarup Damodar, Ram Ray 

^nd hundreds of his followers were seeking him 

-everywhere in the streets of Puri, and Raja 

Pratap Rudra was himself in a state of great 

anxiety. When the fisherman brought him back, 

ihe loud recitation of Krishna's name restored 

«him to his senses, and he looked so pale, exhausted 

and' weak, that they all apprehended that his end 

jnight be near. But he gradually survived, and 

the last act on his part described by the Charita,- 

■mrita was to give Ram Ray some practical 

■ advice in spiritual matters. 

^ Advice to Earn Ray. „ -„ i -, -i ■ 

."' "Become good and consider 

f yourself humbler than a straw " he said and 
thfin, " Be patient as a tree. It does not com- 
.plain if any one outs it. It does not beg a drop 
^of water from anybody though it dries up. It 
gives freely its treasure of flowers and fruits 
stojiny one that seeks them. It exposes itself 

33 



t5S CHAITANYA AND HIS AG:^ 

to rain and sun but gives all its treasure to 
others. A Vaishnab should be absolutely with- 
out pride. He should consider that Krishna 
dwells in every soul and therefore give respects 
to others, without seeking any for himself. 
One who becomes like this and then recites 
Krishna's name, is rewarded with a love for 
Him." As he spoke in this way, a feeling of 
great humility came into his soul, and he 
prayed to Krishna "Oh Krishna, make me 
humble and give devotion unto my soul." And 
then referring to a verse of Padmavali he said 
" Neither do I want followers, nor wealth nor 
learning, nor poetical powers, give unto my 
soul a bit of devotion for thee." He prayed 
again and again in the spirit of a true servant 
" Here accept my most humble services but give 
me as my wages — a bit of devotion for thee." 
Then he again referred to a verse composed by 
himself to be found in the Padmavali " As eager- 
ness to taste God's love grows in the soul, tears 
come to the eyes like drops in the rainy season." 
He said next " The world looks void without 
Krishna. Even if he gives me pain that would be 
my joy ; for whatever he gives me, like a loyal 
wife accepting any gift from her husband, — be 
it ill or be it good in the world's eyes, — should be 
always accepted as bliss. I do not covet any- 
thing for myself. Whatever he gives is my joy, 
be it pain or be it pleasure in the world's eyes." 



THE UNSOLVED PROBLEM 259 

As he spoke this, his eyes glistened with tears, 
till trembling with emotion he fell senseless pn 
the spot, 

(fi) Mis passing away. 

Here Charitamrita ends, and Chaltanya 
Bhagavata also does not illuminate us as 
to how Chaitanya passed away. Murari's 
Chaitanya Charita and Kavikarnapur's standard 

biography of Chaitanya say 
Biiln^.""""^'""'^ "^ nothing on the point. In the 

earlier chapters each one of 
these works had referred to Saka 1455 (1533 
A.D.) as the year of his passing away. But 
how and when he did so is not mentioned. A 
general conspiracy of silence is observed by all. 
In the printed edition of Chaitanya Mangal 
by Lochan Das, published by Battala Press, 
there is no reference as to how the end, long 
expected, at last came about. In one of the 
recent editions of the work, the reading of which 
was settled on consulting several very old 
manuscripts, published by the Bangabasi Press, 
there is a passage with a bare hint, and this is 
not found in the main body of the book but the 
editor appends it to the foot-note. 

The general belief amongst the educated 
Bengalis so long was that as Chaitanya fell in 
an unconscious state into the sea, that was clear 



'Zm CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

Enough and that the story of his rescue by a 

fisherman was afterwards fabricated, the sea 

must have buried the great 

Drowned in the sea. 

apostle under its deep waters. 
The popular superstition is that Chaitanya 
whose physical frame had nothing material in it, 
passed into the image of Jagannath at OPuri. 
The priests of the Gopinath's temple relate a 
similar story in respect of Ohaitanya's passing 
into the image of that temple, and as an 
evidence to substantiate their statement, point 
out a sign near the knee of Gopinath whidh 
they say, indicates the spot through which 
Chaitanya was incorporated with the image. 
The latter tradition seems to be upheld and indi- 
cated by a line in one of the biographies, which, 
however^ says in not a very clear language, " We 
lost Chaitanya in the temple of Gopinath." 
.There is no doubt that the Vaishnab hip-; 

,Thereason of their graphers do not spcak of the 
general silence. gjj^ of Chaitanya because they 

feel a great pain in relating it. Their grief 
wa? quite overwhelming ; moreover their belief 
is that it is a sin to hear of the end of one who 
is for all times and can never die. For fifty years 
after the tirodhan of the great teacher, the 
Vaishnab community lay enervated by the great 
shock. Their Kirtana music which had taken 
the whole country by surprise stopped for a time 
after that melancholy event and was not beard 



WHY WERE THE DOOES SHUT . Zdl 

for nearly half a century in the great proyinces 
of Bengal and Orissa. We do not get authentic 
: records of the progress of the Vaishnab com- 
munity for this long period from after 1533,— 
the year when Chaitanya disappeared from the 
world. 

So we have quite a reasonable ground as to 
w;hy no mention of the passing away of Chaitanya 
is found in his standard biographies. But we 
cannot agree with those who believe that he was 
drowned. The Charitamrita says distinctly that 
he was rescued from the sea by a fisherman, and 
when we find mention of events subsequent to 
his rescue in the pages of that book, and when 
no other authority contradicts the statement rior 
says that Chaitanya was drowned in the sea, 
what justification is there for attaching so much 
importance to a mere conjecture that he was 
lost in the deep waters of the Bay of Bengal. 
What happened seems to be this ; some of 
our modern scholars having only a superficial 
knowledge of the Vaishnab literature, perplexed at 
not finding any clear mention of the end of 
Ohaitanya's career, made a surmise like this^ in 
order to give an easy solution to a difficult 
historical problem. They might have been 
excused if they had spoken of it in a language 
of doubt stating that it was a mere conjecture 
on their part. But they showed a lack of 
ordinary historical sense "by declaring as 



262 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

absolutely certain what was at best a mero 
surmise on their part. 

We have, however, definite information on 
this obscure point from Ohaitanya Mangal by 
Jayananda, brought to light some years ago, by 
Prachyavidya-maharnava Nagendranath Basu 
and edited by him and published by the Sahitya 
Parishat of Calcutta. It should be remem- 
bered that this work is not recognised by the 
Vaishnavas ; hence the author, who was outside 
the pale of the school of Brindaban from which 

sprang all canons and censor- 
how^SasseTawty."* ship in literary matters, could 

exercise his own discretion in 
using his materials and was not handicapped while 
writing things, such freedom not being allowed 
in strictly orthodox literature. This book says 
that during the Car-festival of Jagannath 
in Ashar 1455 Saka, Chaitanya got a hurt 
in his left foot from a small brick in the 
coarse of his dancings. Then on the sixth Hthi 
the pain increased and he could not rise from 
his bed. On the seventh tithi at ten dandas of 
night (about 11 p.m.) he passed away from the 
world having suffered from a sympathetic fever. 
Now this account seems to be quite true, as 
several very old Mss. of Jayananda's Chaitanya 
Mangal have been recovered which proves be- 
yond doubt the genuineness of the printed 
edition. There seems to be something, like an 



tHE DA^TE AND THE HOtJR 263 

indirect corroboration of this statement by an- 
other account given in Lochan Das's Chaitanya 
Mangal. The text appended to the Bangabasi 
edition of that book says that on the seventh 
tithi of Ashar on Sunday at tritiya prahar 
(between 3 and 4 p.m.) Chaitanya passed into 
the image of Jagannath, and at the time the 
priests shut the gate of the temple against all 
enquirers. The Chaitanya Mangal further adds 
that none of the followers of Chaitanya had 
been allowed to see the Master for a long time 
before he disappeared. Amongst the crowd that 
had pressed in vain for entrance into the Temple 
we find Sribas, Mukunda Datta, Gauridas and 
others. But the priests could by no means be 
persuaded to open the gates. 

Thus from two independent accounts we find 
that it was on the seventh tithi of Ashar Saka 
1455 that Chaitanya left this world. There are 
two pahkhas in a month, the one white and the 
other dark. Whether the seventh tithi belonged 
to the white or the dark pakkha is not stated, 
but this may be easily found out from the fact 
that th6 Car-festival takes place in the white 
pakkha. So it was the seventh titU of the white 
pakkha, and in both the accounts we find Sunday 
to be the date of Ohaitanya's tirodhan. The year 
of course is well known, for not only these two 
works but all accounts agree in saying that 
Chaitanya passed in Saka 1455, corresponding to 



264 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

the year 1533 A.D. The only point that remains 
to be settled is that according to Jayananda the 
time of tirodhan is 11 p.m. and according to 
Lochan Das 4 p.m. "We may, however, make a 
reasonable guess as to the fact of the case. 
Chaitanya was in the Jaganath temple when 
he suffered from high fever. When the priests 
apprehended his end to be near they shut 
the Gate against all visitors. This they did 
to take time for burying him within the 
temple. If he left the world at about 4 p.m. 
the doors, we know, were kept closed till 11 p.m. 
— this time was taken for burying him and re- 
paring the floor after burial. The priests at 11 
p.m., opened the gates and gave out that 
Chaitanya was incorporated with the image, of 
Jagannath. So according to one account he 
passed away at 11 p.m. But the better informed 
people knew that he had passed away at 4 p.m., 
when the doors were closed. 

In all our almanacs the tiihis of births and 
deaths of all distinguished Vaishnavas are giveo'; 
but Chaitanya's birth tithi is only mentioned 
there. The compilers of almanacs seem also tp 
have joined the general conspiracy on this point. 
The Vaishnavas believe in the birth of Chaitatiya 
but would not believe in his death. 

I have clearly put my doubt in some of my 
previous lectures ; the question may be asked, if 
Lochan Das's account is true, why did not jihe 



*rHE MARK IN THE KNEE 265 

priests open the gates ? The answer is a simple 
one, the priests would not like to shew him 
dying as an ordinary man. They declared that 
they had witnessed with their own eyes that 
Chaitanya passed into the image of Jagannath. 
This report would certainly prove his divinity 
and make it absolutely beyond doubt. They 
buried him somewhere under the floor of the 
temple and would not allow any outsider to enter 
it until the place was thoroughly repaired and 
no trace left after his burial as I have already 
stated. This is the only rational explanation that 
may be advanced for explaining their conduct in 
shutting the temple gate. Probably they did 
so with the permission of Raja Pratap Rudra. 
But I think I go too far in suggesting that 
monarch's conniving at their conduct. 

When a report like this got into the air, it is- 
not unnatural that the priests of the Gopinath 
temple were tempted to give out a similar story! 
associating the event with their own temple.. 
The golden mark on the left knee is still shown 
to the pious pilgrims, as marking the spot 
through which the spirit of Chaitanya passed 
into the Gopinath image, and the priests 
certainly charge fees for shewing it. 



34 



CHAPTER XII. 

Chaitanya as a Teacher. 

(a) Love — its various phases in the spiritual plane. 

(i) Service to fellow-men and compassion for the 
depressed castes. . .: 

(c) Social reformation, — Vaisnava Jurisprudence. 

{d) His commanding personality, many-sidedness of 
character and scholarship. 

{«) Spiritual emotions, love for mother, his influence 
oil the Vaisnava poets. 

A European scholar writes "When all pos- 
sible allowances have been made, it is difficult 
to acquit Chaitanya of the charge of being 
lacking in sanity and poise."' Another writer of 
distinction Dr. MacNichol speaks sneeringly of the 
sensubusness and lack of moral sense in Chandi- 
das's poems and even does not spare Chaitanya., 
He says "We are told that in his last days he would 
spend whole nights singing the 

Some hostile opinions. „ ^i ,., ■, ^t-j 

songs of Chandida,s and vidya- 
pati, and we may be sure that they were the 
inspirations as well of his earlier years." 

' Underwood's article on Chaitanya and Vaishnavism in Bengal, the 
Clalcatta Review, No, 295, p. SO. 



THE DETRACTORS 267 

Mr. Beveridge, the historian, writes in the Royal 
Asiatic Society Journal " Chaitanya was a 
dreamer and more akin to George Fox than to 
Luther. He abandoned his household duties and 
his head was always in the clouds. If he did not 
actually commit suicide, he certainly tried to 
drown himself. I am not sure if he really 
helped the world." 

It must be said for the sake of truth that 
inspite of the harsh comment that we have just 
quoted, both Mr. Underwood and Dr. MacNichol 
admitted Chaitanya to be a great saint. Says 
the former " Chaitanya came at a time when 
Buddhism was a spent force in Bengal afed the 
spiritual life of the people at a very low ebb. 
But loving God as undoubtedly he did with all 
the ardour of a passionate and imaginative soul, 
he was able to fill with blessedness and joy the 
lives of many in whom the springs of the soul's 
devotion were well nigh dried up and to whom' 
God seemed far away " and MacNichol follows 
the strain and writes, "So fervent was his'' 
rapture and so intense his desire to be to Kriishna 
as Radha was to her divine lover that we can 
well believe that he was sometimes heard to. 
murmur " I am He. " 

Many European writers like Dr, Anderson and 
Dr. Carpenter (the latter calls him an Indian St. 
Prancis) and others have given just tribute of: 
honour to the great Vaisnava apostle, but we need. 



268 CHAITANYA ANi) HIS AG^ 

not refer to their remarks in the present treatise. 
Chaitanya loved God as no man before or after 
him has ever loved. The "Western idea of love 
for God is generally embodied in the spirit 
of obedience that a servant owes to the master. 
In Christ we see the resigned affection of a 
child towards father. In the lives of European 
mystics in a few isolated cases we find human 
soul longing for Him as a bride does for the 
bridegroom. Some of the mystics as St. Juan 
of the Cross, St. Teresa and Angela of Toligno 
loved Christ as the bridegroom of their soul. 
In the old Jewish conception of the Church as 
the bridegroom, no doubt conceived after the 
idea of the Buddhist Sangha — in the song of 
songs which is Solomon's, the spiritual desire of 
the soul with all its sexual demands is expressed 
in a poetical way. But Underwood tells us that 
in Europe such things have always been more or 
less of an isolated nature ; and they are np lon- 
ger held allegorical by the vast majority of 
Christians but read as literature. Hallam tells 
us that Buddhist ideas from the tenth to the 
fourteenth centuries had spread themselves in the 
religious atmosphere of the Christians. 

When love for God assumes the form of a 
servant's duty to the Master, which is now the 
generally accepted conception of man's relation 
to God in Europe, we know that the whole fabric 
pf religion would stand on the fulfilment of 



PATERNAL AND NOT FILIAL 269 

a man's moral duty. This is emphasized in 
Europe's religious literature of the present day 
which advocates the theory of work to be man's 
chief if not the only object. I do not believe 
that Christ's childlike dependence on God forms 
any real part of the religious views of modern 
Christendom. Had such an idea developed in 
Europe, the idea of God as mother would not 
have been inconceivable to European Christians 
as it is now. Once granted that man is a child of 
God, the idea of dependence creates a place for 
motherhood. Sex in respect of the Supreme 
power barring our acceptance of the deity in the 
aspect of a mother is untenable. In India God 
has been accepted both as father and mother 
from the Vedic age, and a large literature has 
developed in respect of the Mother-cult along 
with that illucidating the fatherhood of the deity. 
This paternal relation of the deity is superior 
in quality to that existing between a servant 
and a master and emphasizes the moral aspects 
of religious philosophy in a far less forcible 
manner. The child resigns and depends on the 
word of father which raises him far above 
moral obligations. But it should be presumed 
that the moral sense is perfected in one 
before one would aspire to accept God as a parent. 
If there is any flaw in one's moral nature one 
cannot raise himself from the position of servant 
to that of a child. 



270 CHAITANYA AND HlS AGE 

I should here refer to Batsalya which 
presents a unique aspect in the religion of 
emotion, it is not filial but paternal feeling. 
The Vaisnavas have made a departure in their 
conception of Batsalya from the ordinary signi- 
ficance of this rasa in the spiritual word. 

In ordinary sense God is the recognised 

Father of the world and we, as children of God, 

have filial duty to perform to 

Tbe Batsalya rasa. -rr* T»i."i.i iii j 

' Him. But it should be under- 

stood that the Vaisnavas recognise no element 
in the conception of their spiritual experiences 
which is not associated with emotions of joy. 

A son's feeling to his parents is more or less 
connected with a sense of duty and reverence. 
The parents delight in the cbild, but in the first 
stage the child's position is one of unconscious 
resignation and latterly that of one who has 
certain duties to perform. Neither of these 
positions give him any opportunity to enjoy rasa 
or bliss as conceived by the Vaisnavas. 

The Vaisnavas, in the higher stages of their 
emotional felicities, altogether dispense with every 
form of sentiment associated with duty or extra- 
neous compulsion. The greatest sacrifices are 
to be made but the spirit should be such as to 
proceed in the path of joy, not impelled by a 
sense of duty. 

This sort of sacrifice is made by parents, espe- 
cially by mother who sufi'ers all, but the spirit 



GOD REVEALED IN THE BABY 271 

that actuates her is far from one of duty. She 
suffers for affection, which is her sole inspiring 
force. The mother, says the Vaisnava, finds a 
manifestation of God in the child. Por the 
child, whatever may be its external form, reveals 
to the mother, perfect beauty and perfect bliss. 
She conceives the blessedness of this feeling t6 
such an extent that she becomes ready for every 
kind of martyrdom, — but not at all from a sense 
of duty. 

According to the Vaisnavas, God reveals 
Himself to the old, wrinkle-faced, care-worn 
world in the child, as the never-ending promise 
of the new, the gay and the beautiful. The old, 
— the rotten and the faded world passes away 
froni view, but the new, the fresh and the 
surprisingly beautiful takes its place. The 
Vaisnavas salute this ever New and call it God, 
recognising the holiness and the eternal 
felicities inspired by the Deity in the small form 
of the new comer. 

The angle of vision is thus changed. The 
Vaisnavas do not call God Pather, or if they 
have called Him so any time, they have done so 
as a mere matter of form ; they do not reserve 
a place of father in their conception of the Diety. 
They call and know the child — to be God. Por 
this beautiful thing, absolutely pure, fresh and 
new fills the minds of the parents with infinite 
delight : God comes as a child to every home, as 



872 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

the loveliest symbol of the preservation of the 
world, of life in the midst of death, of hope in 
the midst of decaying forms, and as one for 
whom the greatest sacrifices are made without 
a consciousness of duty on the part of those who 
undergo them and one who typefies in the eyes 
of the parents, ideal beauty and ideal love. Is 
it not really wonderful that the tigress, the 
lioness and the softest of the woman-kind in the 
human world look upon the new-born with equally 
tender eyfes of affection — eyes full of never to be 
allayed thirst and unceasing wonder ? The most 
beautiful, the most attractive has come to the 
home, giving promise of the continuance of this 
fair world. The dry leaves and the withered 
flowers here gladly make room for the new which 
blossoms to-day in the full glory of the present 
and • giving hope and promise of the future. 
Eecognition of Godhead in the child is one of 
the most attractive features of the Vaisnava 
theology and this is their Batsalya rasa. The 
child-Christ of the European mystics makes an 
approach to this conception of the Vaisnava 
mind, though not in its perfectly flowering 
aspect. 

I need not enter into and discuss the nice 

five-fold classifications of a man's relation to God 

as detailed by Ram Ray in 

o urya ^^.^ discourses with Ohaitanya, 

when the latter met him on the banks of 



SEXUAL LOVE 273 

Godavari in 1510 A.D. But I must say that 
beyond this sphere of man's duty to God as of 
a servant to the Master and even beyond that 
of resignation and absolute dependence of a 
child on his parent is the sphere of love between 
man and vroman denominated the Madhurya 
rasa by the Vaisnavas, and it must be said that 
each of the lower stages comprehends and pre- 
supposes perfection of moral duty, and without 
this, ascent to any higher stage is impossible. 

This sexual love — the beauty of which has 
ever attracted the human mind, — which has made 
Valmiki and Homer write the grandest and most 
charming epics, and Dante suffer as few have 
sufEered, — which sounds the sweetest on musi- 
cian's lyre and the shepherd's flute, — the sexual 
love which forms the quintessence of every lyric 
and song and on which human energies are ever 
at work, in hundreds of stories, romances and 
fables, — this love which forms the chief attraction 
of some of the greatest dramas, making all other 
human action subservient to it, of which the 
whole paraphernalia of natural scenery serves 
as the background, this love, it must be ad- 
mitted, is the most significant and the most 
powerful element in human life, nay it is 
mystic in its infinite strangeness and maddening 
force. Every one of us has felt this love 
more or less in life, and who can say, that 
howsoever intellectual and sober a man may be, 

35 



274 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

he has preserved the poise and equilibrium 
of his head when under love. Shakespeare says 
that the lover, the poet and the lunatic have 
kindred elements. In fact love is not calm 
but a storm of nature. The sea when tranquil 
presents a beautiful sight, but it rises to sublime 
beauty in a tempest, and what painter will say 
that he did not get the highest inspiration from 
the sight of a storm in which beauty and subli- 
mity are mixed together? Equilibrium and 
poise are not the criterions in the region of 
poetry and emotion. 

Now if storm is the nature of love, if its 
romance consists in the excess of poetic imagina- 
tion, we cannot dictate boundaries to its sphere, — 
much less so when it tries to bring the Infinite 
to the realisation of and in the nearness of the 
finite. It must be admitted that Chaitanya was 
the one man who loved God with an ardou 
which calls forth the whole poetry of the 
human mind. He is a poor observer of human 
nature who says that Chaitanya showed a 
lack of moral sense. Moral side must be perfect 
in a man who thinks of scaling the height of 
loving the Highest. He loved God as a child 
loves his parents. He served Him as a servant 
serves his master. But more, he loved God as his 
bridegroom who had entirely captivated his soul. 
That he was ever keen to his great moral obliga- 
tions will be observed from many instances. Let 



BROTHERHOOD 275 

us discuss the reason that led to his scmyds. He 
did not turn a recluse or a pessimist by becoming 
a scmyasi. He had told Govinda and others that 
because he was a house-holder, the educated 
people of the country did not accept his teach- 
ings. So a great renunciation was necessary. 
He said he was sorry to see the miseries of the 
people ; he must go from door to door singing 
the name of Krishna. " The vicious Tantricks, 
the Aghore Panthies, the Chandals and low-born 
men, the king and the poorest of his subjects 
will all feel the irresistible charm of Krishna's 
name. I cannot be at rest when the world 
is so unhappy around me. He that threatens 
to assault me to-day will see me a beggar 
to-morrow singing Krishna's name at his door." 
He fulfilled to the letter what he had said ; for 
sinners of all classes, scholars who revelled in 
intellectual heights, the unbelievers, the robbers 
and harlots gathered round him and were re- 
formed by the power of Krishna's name, and if 
Mr. Beveridge says that he neglected his house- 
hold duties, it was as the Charitamrita says " for 
the good of all, this sacrifice should not be called 
a breach of duty." People in hundreds left home 
and went to kill others and be killed themselves 
for the sake of what they called nationality in 
the great war and we praise them though their 
deaths have created gaps in their families that can 
never be filled up. But the sacrifice of home-life 



876 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

in the interest of humanity which the Buddha 
and Chaitanya made without bloodshed and 
inspired by a real and genuine love for fellow 
men, cannot be appreciated by Mr. Beveridge ! 

(b) Service to fellow-men and compassion 
for the depressed castes. 

How far are we away from Chaitanya to 
judge him properly! We love our wives and 
children and at best our nation, but he alone 
loved God, which means loving the whole 
universe — the creation of its Maker. It was 
uot an attempt on his part to reach a high 
stage of spiritual life by extinguishing his 
desires. It was the one great factor of his life, 
the one great inspiration and the one great 
poetry that moved his whole existence. He was 
certainly not one like us, and if Mr. Beveridge 
has any doubt as to what help he did to the 
world, let him come and observe the villages of 
Bengal. In almost every house of the rustic 
peasant and artisan his name is chanted with 
loving regards. This has sweetened their lives 
and made them the most well-behaved and 
virtuous of world's peasantry ; and love of God is 
meaningless, if it does not imply the same ardour 
in loving humanity. We have seen him at 
the earliest stage of spiritual life carrying the 
baskets of worshippers, wj-inging out waters from 
the clothes of old men whose hands shook in their 



CHARITY 277 

efforts to do so owing to infirmity, and carrying the 
clothes of others on the banks of the Ganges. This 
service to men, he says, was holy as it helped to 
bring to his soul devotion for God. The Maddhya- 
khanda, Ch. 14, Verse 20 of the Charitamrita 
gives an account of how Ohaitanya delighted in 
feeding the poor. At Munna in the Madras 
Presidency he begged clothes and food from 
people in order to provide a half-starVed 
old woman who stood in need of help. At a 
place named Amjhora in the Central Pro- 
vinces, we find it described in Govinda's Karchai 
Chaitanya had once absolutely no food for 
two days and on the third day he got a 
present of 2 seers of flour with which he 
prepared 16 breads. There were four men to 
be served with these, — Ramananda, Govinda- 
charan, Govinda Karmakar and Chaitanya 
himself. At this stage one old man came^ 
there with a boy and asked for something 
to eat and Chaitanya gave him his share though 
he had fasted for two days. These little acts of 
charity are almost negligible facts in a man who 
had renounced the world with all its pleasures 
for God's love. And I would not have mentioned 
them here but for the reason that these little 
things seem to carry an exaggerated importance 
now-a-days, especially with those who having 
materialistic views of life can understand the 
value of moral duties but cannot realise the 



278 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

mystic • delight of the true and beautiful 
oriental mind enjoying communion with the 
Deity. The moral world is one of mere pebbles 
and stones of the foundations upon which that 
Diamond Harbour of the soul is built, full of 
ecstasies and sweet emotions. The great thing 
that Chaitanya gave to the people was a bit of 
his love for God which sanctified the lives of 
sinners and of the fallen and soothed souls 
that were weary and heavy-laden — not by 
sermons or speeches, but by what Fraser calls 
about him, " the mesmeric influence of his 
presence."^ 

Those that would say that he was lacking in 
poise should be reminded of his many-sided 
intellectual activities and his heroic attitude in 
the reorganisation of the Hindu society. He 
selected men from amongst his followers to 
work in different spheres of life for the propaga* 
tion of faith and social reformation, "We find 
it mentioned in many places of his different 
biographies that he held secret discourses with 
Nityananda regarding social matters and so 
privately was the conversation conducted that 
none was allowed to enter the room. Nitya- 
nanda was appointed by him to stay in Bengal 
with the sole charge of social reformation. 
Chaitanya had found the caste-system eating 

' Literary History of India by E. W. Fraser, p. 350. 



NO BRAHMIN, NO SUDRA 2?9 

into the vitals of our social fabric, and he and 
his followers were determined to root out this 
evil from the land. Por, the moment that you 
say that you love God, all human beings will 
.be your brethren ; there will be no Brahmin, no 
Sudra. Chaitanya proclaimed this, in an unquali- 
fied language. He said " He that eats a meal 
cooked by a Dom becomes pre-eminently 
entitled to the grace of God," The Dom is 
certainly the lowest caste in Bengal. The motto 
of the Vaishnavas was " Even a Chandal 
should be held higher than Brahmin if he has 
devotion for God" and this is a well-known text 
of the Naradiyai Puran. " If a Muchi (cobbler) 
prays to God with devotion I bow a hundred 
times to his feet " said Chaitanya.^ I am afraid 
my European readers will hardly be able to 
realise the position of a Muchi in our society. 
His touch is held to be more hateful than that 
of a dog. Chaitanya not only preached the 
equality of men but sometimes advocated a 
somewhat forward step in the practice of 
this doctrine. We find in the last chapter 
of Oharitamrita that one Kalidas, an uncle of the 
celebrated apostle Haghunath Das of Saptagram, 
used to eat the refuse from the plates of low- 
caste men. Kalidas was born of a Kayastha 
family of high status and was himself a great 

' ChaitaDya Bhagbat, Antya Khanda. ^ 



280 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

scholar. This habit that he had acquired from 
his youth might he construed into a sort of 
foolish mania, the whims of an unbalanced mind. 
But he was in reality inspired by propagandism. 
He had resolved to eat the refuse simply to give 
a rude shock to the popular prejudice that the 
man of an unclean caste was not worthy of touch 
— the food touched by him was unclean. One 
could eat from the plate from which a dog or cat 
had eaten, but not even touch the plate used by 
one of the unclean castes. When the caste-rules 
were so stringent Kalidas's conduct was certainly 
held heroic by the reformers. Once at Purl 
there lived a man named Kanai, who helonged 
to the sweeper caste, one of the lowest castes in 
Bengal, but a cleanlier man than Kanai did not 
exist in the country in respect of morals and 
devotion to God. Kalidas called on Eanai one 
day and bowed to him, at which that very 
humble soul mildly protested saying that as a 
Kayastha he should not have bowed to a sweeper. 
Kalidas ofEered him a mango, and when Kanai 
had partaken of a part and thrown away the 
remnant, Kalidas picked it up and began to 
taste it. This was a horror to all, a Kayastha 
eating the refuse of a sweeper. But when 
Ohaitanya heard of this he praised and blessed 
him saying that God's grace would be on him, 
since he honoured merit and not caste. In his 
own life his treatment of Haridas, Rupa, 



HARIDAS AlSfD SANATAN z'Sl 

Sanatan and Ram Ray showed that he was no 
respecter of caste. At a feast held at Puri he 
ordered that Haridas, the Mahomedan convert, 
should he first served. In the Vaishnava commu- 
nity the highest respect, generally shown to 
the most exalted Brahmins, used to he 
shown to Haridas even at religious func- 
tions. Chaitanya often touched Haridas saying 
" I feel myself purified hy your touch." And 
when Haridas died he made all the good 
Brahmins drink water touched hy his foot. His 
conduct towards Sanatan also showed the same 
catholicity and affection. Sanatan, though origi- 
nally a Brahmin, had adopted the ways of a 
Mahomedan and had consequently been out- 
casted by the Hindu society. In the early years 
of acquaintance when Chaitanya was about to 
touch him, he would shrink back saying " No 
Master, I am unclean." But Chaitanya would 
forcibly embrace him and say, " You have dedi- 
cated yourself to me saying ' I am yours from 
to-day ' ; that body of yours is mine in every 
respect ; an all-sacrificing and all -loving spirit 
dwells in it, it is holy as a temple. Why 
should you consider yourself unclean ?" Thus 
in vain did Haridas protest against Chaitanya 
touching him. When Chaitanya first met Ram 
Roy he ran into his arms and wept for joy. The 
Brahmins who were there on the banks of the 
Godavari all wondered and said " Look at this 
36 



282 CHAITANYA A;ND HIS AGE 

Brahmin ascetic ! He looks brilliant as the sun. 
Why does he touch a Sudra and weep ?" It 
should be borne in mind that there was no relaxa- 
tion of caste-rules in favour of these men, 
though they were distinguished as saints. It is 
true that Haridas, the Mahomedan, had accepted 
the Vaishnava faith and turoed a smmyasi. But 
the Brahmins of Santipur headed by Jadunandan 
Acharya had at first treated him with contempt 
and offered him great resistance. We have it on 
the authority of several standard biographies of 
Chaitanya that the people of Santipur had 
taken great objection to Haridas interpreting 
the scriptures of the Hindus. A tank dug by 
Sanatan in Jessore still exists, the water of 
which is held unclean up to this day by the 
Hindus, because it is associated with the name of 
one who had once adopted Mahomedan ways. 
His subsequent conversion to Vaishnavism was 
not regarded as a sufficient atonement. In the 
country-side the character of Chaitanya, as the re- 
deemer of the fallen and a reformer of the society, 
is held in high appreciation. In the humble huts 
of the peasants and other loW-caste people, praises 
and tributes of worship are offered to him every 
night and the song "Praise unto Chaitanya the 
god-man of Nadia, the freiend of the fallen and 
one who does not believe in caste " is often sung 
in chorus. The popular songs from the time of 
Govinda Das and Balaram Das who flourished in 



CASTE-DISTINCTION 283 

the sixteenth century down to the present times 
have all this one burden. Krishna Das, a poet 
of that period, writing about the evils that were 
driven out from the country by the advent of 
Chaitanya, says " Our chief complaint is now re- 
moved, there is no distinction of caste." Govinda 
Das sings in his rhythmical and impressive style, 
ill preserved in my translation, " Chaitanya never 
cares for caste ; he is a sea of compassion and 
embraces Chandals and other low castes with 
tears in his eyes." Sivananda, the esteemed friend 
of Chaitanya, says in a song "The high and low 
in the social scale are brought to the same level 
by Chaitanya" and Balaram Das repeats the 
same idea " He weeps embracing the fallen, the 
destitute and the low."' 

(c) Social reformation — Vaishnava jurisprudence. 

Chaitanya entrusted the charge of reforma- 
tion of society, as already stated, to Nityananda. 
This saintly man, though a Brahmin, ate the food 
cooked by Uddharan Datta of the Subarnabanik 
caste (one of the unclean castes) and he spent his 
t-ime chiefly in the houses of low-class men. 
Khardaha, the residence of Nityananda, became 
the chief centre and resort of the Vaishnavas, 
from which emanated laws that governed the 



See Gaurapada Tarangini. 



284 CHAITANTA AMD HIS AGE 

VaisTinava community. The Goswamis of 
Khardaha^ and Santipur, the descendants of 
Nityananda . and Adwaita respectively, opened 
their portals of brotherhood to all men irres- 
pective of castes. The fallen Buddhists, mainly 
represented by the mercantile classes of Bengal 
with a few exceptions, had lived as out-castes. 
They were accepted in the Temple of Brother- 
hood raised by the Vaishnavas. No Brahmin 
Would formerly do any religious function in 
their houses. Bat the Vaishnava Goswamis 
accepted them as disciples, ate at their houses 
and agreed to do priestly offices in their 
temples. Had not Ohaitanya accepted these 
men in his Order, in all probability they would 
have embraced the Islam, as a large number 
of Bengal Buddhists had already done. Nitya- 
nanda and his son Birabhadra admitted 
into the Vaishnava Order 1,200 Neras (Buddhist 
monks) and 1,300 Neris (Buddhist nuns). This 
acceptance of the fallen was a great act of 
mercy, to commemorate which these Nera-Neri& 
held an annual fair at Kharda for about 400 
y6ars. The historic fair was discontinued 
about ten years ago owing to financial diffi- 
culties. It does not, however, reflect any 
credit on the descendants of Nityananda that they 
have given up this -memorable institution. They 
could raise funds for it by appealing to the 
public. The spot where this fair used to sit was 



VAIDYA AND KAYASTHA GURUS 285 

about six years ago visited by a European scholar 
who designated it as the place of the death 
of Buddhism in Bengal. 

Many were the complaints that were made 
against Nityananda for breaking the caste-rules, 
and Sribasa was called jati-nasha, a destroyer of 
caste, because he had allowed Nityananda to live 
with him. But the Vaishnavas repudiated caste 
in an uncompromising way. One of their poets 
sings, " He that seeks castes among the Vaish- 
navas is a sinner." In later times Narottam, 
a Kayastha, was raised to the status of a 
Brahmin by the unanimous voice of the 
Vaishnavas gathered at a meeting held at 
Kheturi in the district of Bajshahi. The 
leaders proclaimed that one who had realised 
God in his heart was a true Brahmin and one 
who merely wears the sacred thread was so in 
name. We find Narahari Sarkar of Srikhanda, 
the famous poet and friend of Chaitanya, and 
Narottam Das of Kheturi who lived in the 
sixteenth century, — one a Vaidya and the other a 
Kayastha, — receiving Brahmin disciples. Nara- 
hari Sarkar was not an ascetic but a householder. 
The exalted position of a Guru in our society 
is; well-known. The disciple has to eat refuse 
from the plate of his Guru and drink the water 
touched by his foot. The revolution, brought 
about in the world of caste by these acts, raised 
a tempest of opposition amongst the orthodox 



286 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

Brahmins, the extent of which might he con- 
eeived from the fact that these Brahmins hissed 
and clapped their hands when the dead body of 
Narottam was being carried for cremation. 
Narasingha, the Raja of Pakkapalli was incited by 
the orthodox Brahmins to undertake a regular 
expedition against Narottam and his followers. 
All these have been elaborately treated by me 
in my ' Medieval Vaisnava Literature of Bengal.' 
The lay Vaishnavas would not now excuse 
any man if he would ask as to what caste 
they had belonged before adopting Vaishnavism. 
One of their writers says " if a Mahomedan or a 
low Sudra turns a Vaishnava he is better than an 
ordinary Brahmin." 

The inspiration of this great revolution came 
of course from Chaitanya himself under whose 
instructions Nityananda organised the Vaishnava 
community in Bengal. It is on these topics 
that Chaitanya frequently, talked in private with 
Nityananda, and it is for the object of leaving 
the latter undisturbed in the course of his recon- 
struction of society that Chaitanya gave him 
no permission to leave Bengal and pay him a 
visit at Puri. Owing, however, to his great 
love for Chaitanya he frequently violated tbis 
order and came to interview him. Chaitanya 
knew perfectly well that Nityananda had not 
the least vanity of caste or learning and, devoted 
entirely to God as he was, he was pre-eminently 



SAKATAINT, as a scholar 28t 

fit to hold the torch of brotherhood and social 
reformation. Hence if any one came from 
Bengal and complained to him against Nitya- 
nanda's conduct in mixing with low-class men 
and receiving presents from them, Chaitanya 
spoke with firmness in the following way " Even 
if I were to hear that Nityananda was a drunkard 
and had great moral vices, I should not lose 
faith in him. I know the metal he is made of." 

Thus we see that he was behind the great ma- 
chinery of social reformation set on foot, guided 
and controlled by him at every stage of the 
advancement of the cause of Vaishnavism in 
this great province. Do these acts look like 
those of one lacking in sanity and poise and 
could such results be ever achieved by one of 
such description ? 

According to the unanimous opinion of 
Vaishnava scholars Sanatan was the most learned 
amongst them in Hindu Jurisprudence. Chai- 
tanya had once told Ram Ray about Sanatan, 
" Where will you find another scholar in the 
whole world as learned as Sanatan ?^ " This man 
who had renounced his high status in life and 
vast fortune and turned a Vaishnava ascetic was 
appointed by Chaitanya to write an elaborate 
work of jurisprudence by which the new Vaish- 
nava community, founded by him, was to be 



^ Chaitanya Charitamrita, Antya I, rerse 114. 



2^8 CHAlTAlSrYA AND HIS AOjfe 

governed. It was not a mere command, but 
Chaitanya himself supplied the synopsis of this 
monumental work. Chaitanya in an elaborate 
discourse impressed on Sanatan his views on 
religion and drew an outline of the work which 
Sanatan was required to compile for elucidating 
the rituals of the bhakU-c\i\t. Sanatan said 
" You have ordered me, Sir, to compile a work of 
jurisprudence for the Yaishnavas. But how can 
such a work be undertaken by me ? I belong to 
a low caste and have hitherto led a life, contrary 
to scriptures. It is only possible for me to ven- 
ture to take up the work in hand if you inspire 
me." Chaitanya replied, " When you will be 
seriously after it, it is God who will inspire and 
help you. But still I will give you briefly a 
synopsis of what your work should contain. You 
should dwell on the following points in an elaborate 
manner, (1) The necessity of Guru in religious 
life. (2) The respective duties of Guru and his 
disciple. (3) The rites of worship and ordinary 
daily duties of a Vaishnava for keeping his body 
and mind clean. (4) The signs of a true Vaish- 
nava, (5) The marks to be worn on his person to 
distinguish him from the people of other sects. 
(6) The sacred plant Tulasi and the sacred dust 
Gopichandana, (7) 130 kinds of rituals. (8) 
The five- fold services of Arati. (9) Parti- 
culars about images, (10) The power of the holy 
name. (11) PenaAces, Japa or recitation of the 



THE OUTING 28? 

Mantras, sacred hymns, perambulation, prostra- 
tion, partaking of the sacramental meal. (12) 
Giving up of the habit of scandalizing, -of evil 
company. (13) To hear the recitation of the Bhaga- 
vata. (14) Fasting on particular days. (15) The 
observances of the festivities of Janmasthami 
(birth of Krishna). (16) Ramnabami (birth of 
Earn). (17) Nrishingha Chaturdashi. (18) How 
Vaishnava temples and images should be made. 

This synopsis embodies all the details of 
Vaishnava religion. But it gives a mere outline 
of what was detailed by Chaitanya himself later 
on in an elaborate manner. Chaitanya himself 
did not care to observe rules and used to say that 
Damodara and Swarupa knew them much better 
than he did. But when he elaborated the 
synopsis for Sanatan he showed a wonderful 
mastery of details. These rituals and outward 
forms comprised restriction of conduct directing 
what a Vaishnava should do and should not do. 
Though Chaitanya described these rituals in 
minute details, he did not recommend them for 
those advanced in spiritual life (Chaitanya 
Charitamrita, Maddhya, 19). He declared that 
these rituals oftentimes received greater attention 
than they deserved and instead of helping rather 
impeded the growth of real spirituality in those 
men who were above the average run. So at a 
certain stage the rituals should be given up 
altogether. The great Hari Bhakti Bilas compiled 

37 



290 CHAI'TAlvrYA AND HIS AGE 

by Sanatau on the lines directed by Chaitanya is 
now the one undisputed guide for the Vaishnava 
community in the performance of their daily 
duties and religious functions, and the Master 
inspired every detail of this monumental work. 
When the work was finished, Sanatan thought 
that as he had at one time adopted Mahomedan 
ways, objection might be raised to its acceptance 
by the orthodox people. So it was published in 
the name of Gopal Bhatta. But we know both 
from the account of Charitamrita, the author of 
which was a disciple of Sanatan, and from the 
elaborate and scholarly commentary on the work 
by Jiva Goswami, nephew of Sanatan, that the 
work was written by the latter under directions of 
Chaitanya Pev. 

So we see that the organisation of the reform- 
ed society on the solid basis of scriptural rules 
satisfying the needs of the IthaMi cult owed its 
existence to Chaitanya though the immediate 
labours of the work were done by Sanatan. 

{d) His commanding personality, many-sided' 
ness of character and scholarship. 

Though when Chaitanya passed into trances 
and mystic visions, he reniained unconscious of 
the physical world, yet we mark frequently a 
dignity in him which commanded respect. In 
the Narendra Sarobar where Adwaitacharya, 



INSPIRED SCHOLARS AND POETS 291 

Nityaninda and others ia the excess of their glee 
had been once playing boyish pranks, the admonish- 
ment of the Master was heard cautioning them 
against behaving in a light-brained way. He 
was below thirty at this time and Adwaitacharya, 
one of the veteran scholars of the day, was over 
eighty years old. Wo find him often stopping 
in the midst of his emotional dance and music 
at the approach of strangers not initiated in the 
bhahti cult. We find him assume a dignified air 
at the approach of the pantheists of Benares, 
though he had been then in one of his heartiest 
emotional felicities. His motto was " With only 
men of our own circle, indulgence in emotion 
and eostacies of spirit were allowed. But before 
lay men one should restrict himself to the recita- 
tion of God's name only." 

In all spheres of religious and spiritual life, 
his activities were found in the most pronounced 
form. Many of the great men of the provinces 
of Orissa and Bengal had joined his Order and 
in the 15th and 16th centuries these places pre- 
sented quite a galaxy of them. Some of them, 
such as Kavikarnapur, RupaandRamananda Ray, 
produced best dramas in Sanskrit. Others shone 
in the field of vernacular poetry as Narahari, 
Basa Ghosh and Goviada Ghosh. There were 
also others great in all-round scholarship, such 
as Sarbabhoum, Adwaitacharya and. Sanatan. 
There were besides men who showed great 



Ii92 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

renunciation by eschewing temporal glories in 
preference to ascetic life, such as Raghunath 
Das, Uddharan Datta and Sauatan. But all of 
them had been inspired in their great works that 
distinguished them by Chaitanya Dev. The 
Bhakti Ratnakar is right in declaring on the 
lines of what had been originally written by the 
author of Charitamrita, that Chaitanya manifest- 
ed his manifold glories firstly through Rama- 
nanda Ray whose life was a conquest over 
passions of the flesh, secondly, through Damodara 
who showed in his life absolute resignation and 
unsparing judgment on others' conduct, thirdly, 
through Haridas who showed an unparalleled 
power of suffering and patience, fourthly, through 
Sanatan and Rupa great spiritual humility, " But 
if we are to name one man who combined in him 
the four-fold qualities of conquest of the flesh, 
absolute resignation, patience and spirituality, 
let us name Chaitanya and none other." 

We need not refer here to Chaitanya's trances 
or emotional dance which are too subtle spiritual 
phenomena in this materialistic age to be rightly 
appreciated outside India, and which have per- 
haps raised the complaint of " lack of sanity " 
in him. But these social revolutions to which 
we have referred and of which he was at the 
helm are indisputable facts of history which 
showed his remarkable powers as a leader of 
men ; and a leader be was, as it has been the 



HIS SCHOLARSHIP 293 

lot of few amongst his contemporaries to be. 
For the purpose of merely catching a sight of 
him, whenever he went in big towns, the 
crowds pressed so thickly around him that 
they filled all imaginable space, ascending the 
roofs of mansions and tops of towers ; and 
old buildings often crumbled down under the 
weight of their feet. Wherever he passed 
by, people gathered sacred dust trodden by him, 
so that the paths were shorn of a layer of earth.' 
His scholarship was great. In fact many of 
the distinguished professors of pantheism who, 
so to speak, had monopolised all mediaeval Indian 
learning, such as Prakashananda, Sarbabhoum 
and Ishwar Bharati were defeated by him in 
public debates. And even when scarcely above 
his teens he had obtained the title of " Lion of 
debate " (Badi Singha) by defeating such a 
haughty scholar as Keshab Kashmiri of the 
Punjab. Chaitanya was also a master of many 
languages, the parallel of whom in that 
period is difficult to be found in the annals of 
India. We learn on the authority of Narahari 
Sarkar, his friend and contemporary, that he 
had acquired Pali and a thorough knowledge 
of Pingal's Prakrit Grammar in the tol of 
Gangadas Pandit at Nadia.^ He had obtained 



' Chaitanya Bhagbata. 
• Goura Pada Tarangini. 



29i CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

the title of ' Vidyasagar ' for his proficiency in 
Sanskrit.* He wrote a commentary on Sanskrit 
Grammar which was taught in the tols of 
Eastern Bengal. That he excelled in Poetics is 
proved by his successful encounter with Keshab 
Kashmiri. According to Ishan Nagar, he had 
written an excellent treatise on logic. Some of 
the verses he wrote in Sanskrit are still extant 
and amongst these eight stanzas are to be found 
in the Kavyaprakasha compiled by Rupa. His 
great proficiency in Vedanta philosophy was 
always in evidence in his public discussions with 
the leaders of the pantheistic schools all over 
India. His knowledge in the scriptures elu- 
cidating the bhakti cult was of course without a 
parallel. He lived in Orissa for 18 years during 
which he acquired a thorough knowledge of the 
language of that province and that he actually 
did so we learn from a reference in the Charita- 
mrita to the fact that he recited an Oriya 
poem beginning with Jaga/mohana Pari/immda, 
etc., bidding Swarupa to sing it to him. Govinda 
Das tells us that he addressed people in the 
Bombay Presidency in Sanskrit and Tamil and 
in another place of the Karcha it is stated that 
he spoke "a language of jargon " to the people 
in the Deccan who spoke " jargon " and adds 
a note further stating that travelling for a long 
time in the Southern India Chaitanya had 

* Adwait Prakash by Ishauuagar. 



AS A LINGUIST 295 

acquired the different popular dinlects current in 
that country. Thus we see that he had acquired 
many of the Dravidian languages of Southern 
India during his tour. As Hindi was the lingua 
franca of India at this period, it goes without 
saying that ho had mastered it having lived in 
the Upper India for six years. That he had 
acquired Maithili is easily observed from the 
fact that he recited songs of Vidyapati day and 
night and at his time these songs had not been 
yet Bengalicised. We thus find that he had 
not only mastered the Indian classical languages 
such as Sanskrit, Pali and Prakrit but also 
different Indian vernaculars such as Tamil, 
Telegu, Malayalam, Canarese, Hindi, Oriya and 
Maithili. • 

{d) Spiritual emotion and love for mother. 
Influence on the Vaishnava poets. 

Next we come to deal with his spiritual 
emotion. It is because of this, as we have 
already stated that the charge of lacking in 
sanity has been laid at his door. But these 
emotions above many other great qualities 
that he possessed was the great weapon with 
which he conquered. If you call it a disease 
it must be, as I have said elsewhere, like the 
pearl in a pearl-fish which is also called a 
disease of the animal. But is it not nevertheless 
the most valued thing in the fish ? Similarly 



206 CHAITANYA AND HIS AG^ 

the trances of CHaitanya were the most wonder- 
ful thing that men ever beheld in him. 
This emotion made his life magnificent 
as a great epic poem. The whole Vaishnava 
lyrics, masterpieces of songs, breathe inspiration, 
of Chaitanya's emotions. True, it related to 
man's love for God ; but it is the most wonder- 
ful love-tale that men ever heard. 

Supposing for a moment that a man can love 
God as a bride does the bridegroom, all the sub- 
limities of feminine emotions become as a matter 
of course the attributes of such a soul. Man 
can be a servant in God's temple ; he may 
even call God a father. But it seems incon- 
ceivable to many how human soul can love God 
as the bride does the bridegroom. We talk of 
duty everywhere. But when one approaches 
his God in love, the question of duty does not 
arise at all. The wife gives her all, and this 
ideal is lowered by restricting her scope to certain 
prescribed rules for the guidance of conduct. 
There can be no question that Chaitanya actu- 
ally fell in love with One so long considered as 
beyond the range of all human conception. And 
lie indulged in all the niceties of emotion relat- 
ing to this romantic situation. Eupa Goswarai, 
who was appointed by Chaitanya to elucidate the 
bhakti cult by writing dramas about Radha- 
Krishna in Sanskrit, wrote exhaustively about 
Ihese emotions. His famous verse beginning with 



GOD AS BRIDEGROOM 297 

" Timde tcmdavene " was no doubt conceived from 
witnessing the solicitude of Chaitanya for hearing 
and reciting Krishna's name. The manifold 
emotions, so poetically conceived in kilahmchit 
of Sanskrit poetics, described by Rupa, com- 
mented upon by Jiva Goswami (who brought out 
the whole wealth of the subtle felicities of the 
soul in love in his annotations) bear the stamp of 
that inspiration which came from Chaitanya*s 
love-ecstasies. How all this is possible is not for 
me to explain, but the sexual romance is nothing 
if it does not teach us to taste the higher joys of 
the spiritual plane. I do not know why the 
question of decency so often arises in respect of 
sexual love, — since it is the purest, the most 
romantic and the most beautiful of all human 
sentiments. If we believe in God and in our 
duty to love him, this sexual love purged of all 
its grossness should be the very type of the 
sentiments with which the highest of us may 
approach Him. Like all things of superior 
quality, this love is delicate and may not bear 
too rough a touch. Hence Chaitanya did not 
speak of it before the public to whom he con- 
fined himself to a mere recitation of Krishna's 
name. But with Swarupa and Ham Ray he 
revelled in the elucidations of the subtler points 
of love-philosophy. Swarupa, at his bidding, 
referred to the various stages and conditions of 
a lover's emotions in his private talk, He spoke 

38 



298 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

of dhira, the maiden in love who being wrongM, 
does not reprimand her lover but gives him a seat 
near her and does not express her anger, speaks 
sweetly and if the lover embraces, returns the 
embrace ; of adhira who being wronged takes 
away the lotus that decorates her ears and 
strikes the lover with it and makes him a captive 
with a string of flowers, of Dhiradhira who 
being wronged speaks crooked words and cuts 
]6kes and is sometimes full of entreaties and at 
others showers abuses or remains indifferent ; 
of Mugdha who being wronged knows not how 
to be angry but covers her face with hands to 
hide her tears and forgets and forgives, if the 
lover smiles and talks pleasantly. There are also 
Maddhyas and Pragalvas. And there are still 
subtler classifications ; for instance the last- 
named two are classified into Mukhara, Mridu, 
Sama, etc. We need not enter into this very com- 
plicated science of love, including other infinite 
varieties of tender emotions, Avhich was no doubt 
developed during the days of the declining 
Hindu power, when the spirit of galantry had made 
it a fashion for the learned to introduce subtle 
classifications of feminine feelings. These were 
no doubt used by Rupa as materials but looked 
at and interpreted from an entirely new stand- 
point as matters of spiritual plane. How 
Chaitanya thought only of his God and His 
relation to man from the nice classifications 



THE GOD-VISIOK 299^ 

which the pages of rhetoric and poetics supplied, 
is not for me to say here ; but there is no doubt 
that his God was near him and that he revelled 
in the mystic delights which that' exalted 
presence brought to his heart in all the various 
shades of feelings which a lover feels in this 
world of ours ; — nay more, for the intensity 
of his love was much greater than that of any 
human lovers ever described by a poet. 

It has been urged in some quarters that the 
object of his worship was not a fit one. But he 
has assured us again and again that as human 
language is not sufficiently adequate to denote 
the sort of love that a man may feel for God, 
the phraseology of human love was adopted 
under the allegorical form of the Gopis loving 
Krishna. One may suppose that he actually 
took the Brinda groves to be the abode of his 
God. He not only did so but he took all the 
shrines that he visited as abodes of his God, 
but not merely that, all the places at which he 
had stopped and through which he had travelled, 
Avere the abode of his God in his eyes. Govinda- 
das records Chaitanya's saying, " Everywhere the 
image of God shines re,splendently. One who has 
attained a clear vision is privileged to see it." He 
visited the shrines associated with Kali, Ganes, 
Shiva and Krishna, and everywhere he felt the 
presence of that God who pervades this universe. 
He visited the shrines only with the object of 



800 CHAtTANYA AND HIS AGE 

experiencing a heightened joy by the associations 
of these places with worship. Por to each and all 
of chese shrines pilgrims have travelled for cen- 
turies, sincerely seeking One who is the final stay 
of the world. Though on account of his peculiar 
bent of mind favouring the emotional side of reli- 
gion, he is identified with the Vaishnavas, yet his 
was the universal catholic religion that made him 
approach every spot of prayer and worship held 
sacred by the devotees with reverence, and he 
felt equal spiritual ecstasies at the temple of 
Kali at Padmakot as he had done before that of 
DwarakajdhishatDwaraka. He rejected nothingin 
the spiritual world, however low it might appear 
to superficial lookers on, just as science rejects 
nothing as useless but by machinery turns rags 
and bits of paper to some fine useful purpose. 
His faith created flowers out of filth. The house 
of harlots or the resorts of robber-gangs he raised 
to the rank of temples by his faith. He paid a 
visit to the image of Kali in the Ashtabhuja 
temple at Padmakot in 1510 A.D. and when 
a Brahmin brought a goat for sacrifice he 
approached him and said " How can you believe it, 
friend, that the Mother of the universe will take 
meat and wine like a drunkard ? The scriptures 
have been wrongly interpreted." His ecstatic 
fervour in the temple and his tears had already 
produced an impression as usual ; and the 
Brahmin as he heard him speak sweetly thought 



RATIONALISM 301 

that he heard the voice of God. He let loose 
the goat and worshipped Kali with simple 
offerings of leaves, flowers and sandal. 

Though temples and shrines were helpful in 
awakening afresh his emotional felicities and 
serving as signs and reminders, he did not share 
at all in popular superstitions. In the Brinda- 
groves some people came and informed him that 
at a certain place in the Jamuna, Krishna 
appeared every night towards its latter part 
riding the great snake Kaliya and many men 
bore testimony to having witnessed the wonder- 
ful spectacle. Chaitanya smiled and said " How 
foolish are you to believe in such a nonsense ! " 
and he appointed some of his intelligent people 
to find out what had deceived the eyes of the 
ignorant men of the shrine. Tn due course the 
report came stating that a fisherman used to 
ply his boat in the Jamuna every night. He was 
mistaken for Krishna and the boat was taken 
for the snake Kaliya and the light in the boat 
was thought of as the red eye of the snake_. In 
Boroch his spiritual fervour became so great 
that a large throng gathered to behold it. One 
man wickedly said " Don't you see your Krishna 
is in the yonder tank." Chaitanya stood up and 
breathed heavily. His eyes shed incessant tears 
at the mention of Krishna. The man again 
said aloud "Just see there, your Krishna is 
in the tank." Then Chaitanya stretched his 



302 CHAITANYA AND HIS AG:B 

hands as if to run into the arms of his lover and 
flung himself into the tank and became uncon- 
scious. He was rescued by the help of the people 
who began to reproach the wicked Brahmin who 
had , said the Krishna was in the tank. On 
coming back to his senses, Chaitanya said " Why 
do you reproach the Brahmin ? Where is He not 
— in earth, waters and in the sky above ?" The 
all-pervading deity was the object of his worship 
and all things that he saw or heard bore a mes- 
sage to him from the Most High. This message 
might have been written in a language which 
is Hebrew or Greek to us, — one that may find a 
parallel in the Song of Songs, or in the song 
celestial of Joydev, or in the phraseology of 
human passion in the Dohas of Kanupad and 
other mystics and saints, but that he received 
such a message, maddening his soul with love 
and elevating it to a plane in which the eyes of 
God and of Man met and exchanged mutual 
glances, admits of no doubt. 

But howsoever the romantic love of Krishna 
may have softened his nature, the Brahminic 
asceticism by which such love was fed and nourish- 
ed was the dominant characteristic that is marked 
in his career subsequent to sannyas. We find 
him declining to keep Govinda Ghosh of Agra- 
dwip on the list of the ascetics of his Order as 
he was found to keep the remnant of a Haritaki 
fruit after Chaitanya had partaken of it, for use 



HtJMlLlTY- 303 

on the next day. " He stores things for the 
morrow like a worldly man" said Chaitanya, and 
sent him back to home-life. We have referred 
to the incident of his refusing to admit junior 
Haridas to his presence for the fault of begging 
alms from Madhabi, an accomplished woman 
" ThesiB men feign asceticism but have lust and 
worldly desire lurking in their hearts. I will 
have nothing to do with such men." Being 
refused admittance to his presence junior Hari- 
das committed suicide after his vain attempts to 
have commiseration from the Master. When- 
ever any man took him for an incarnation of the 
Deity, his overwhelming humility was in evi- 
dence. He declared in all such cases that he was 
a poor mortal and that it would be a sin to attribute 
divinity to him. Though in the Nadia-accounts 
of his earlier life we find him described as often 
asserting his identity with Godhead, these 
accounts coming as they do from some of his fol- 
lowers who tried to establish that he was no other 
than Krishna himself, reincarnated on the earth, 
must be accepted for all their worth with great 
hesitancy. When one of his ardent admirers 
had said once that he was God himself and 
should not subject himself to any moral restraint, 
he replied " I am a man and belong to the Order 
of ascetics. Just as in a white cloth a dark spot 
becomes prominent, even so a flaw in the con- 
duct of an ascetic, however small, becomes the 



304 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

subject of harsh comment ; it is like a pitcher 
full of milk spoiled by a drop of wine." 
Instances of such spiritual meekness lie strewn 
all over his life as a sannyasi and are too numerous 
to be mentioned. 

Though he had cruelly cut himself off from 
home, his love for mother never forsook him, 
and it was one of the most lovable features of 
his character. He interviewed his mother only 
once after his sanwyas, and according to a doubtful 
authority, twice. During such interviews 
he showed his feeling and affectionate regard 
in an unambiguous language. At one of them 
he said " Whatever you bid me do I will do " and 
complying with her request he promised that as 
sannyasi he would live at Puri from which place 
she would have an opportunity of receiving fre- 
quent messages about him. In the last year of 
his life he sent the following message to his 
mother through Jagadananda " Mother, I left my 
immediate duties to you and came away as 
sannyasi. I turned mad and laid axe to the very 
root of all religion by discarding you. Pray 
excuse me for this. I am your affectionate son 
and am entitled to every indulgence." Whenever 
any one came from Nadia he asked him to tell 
his mother that her kitchen was the one place 
which he could never forget. " I have never 
relished any food so well as that cooked by my 
mother." He said often; and we have seen 



VaishnaVa France 365 

how Sachi one day prepared some meals liked by 
Chaitanya for offering to Krishna and wept say- 
ing " Who will eat these — my Nimai has forsaken 
me ?" On one occasion when Damodara told 
Chaitanya that he had derived his spiritual nature 
from his mother, he embraced Damodara with 
love and said that he had spoken the truth. 

All that Chaitanya said about his mother, his 
remorse and all, should be taken for their worth. 
The vision of Krishna Mas ever before his eyes 
and it attracted him to a higher world day and 
night, and when occasionally only he came down 
to the consciousness of his material surroundings, 
he felt temporarily as ordinary good people feel. 
But a moment after he beheld the vision beati- 
fic and passed into a trance forgetting all his 
worldly ties. 

What were these trances ? Mr. Underwood 
says that tbey were similar to those experienced 
by men during what is called Wesleyan Revival. 
" At a revival in 1800," he says, " at Red River, 
Ohio, many dropped to the ground cold and still, 
or with convulsive twitches of face and limbs. 
Others leaped and bounded about like live fish 
out of the water. Others rolled over and over 
on the ground for hours. As the excitement in- 
creased it grew more morbid and took the form 
of " jerking " or in others it became " barking 
exercise" and in yet others it became the "holy 
laugh." The jerks began with the head, which 
39 



306 CttAlTANYA AND HIS AGE 

was thrown violently from side to side so rapidly 
that the features were blurred and the hair al- 
most seemed to snap, and when the sufferer struck 
an obstacle and fell, he would bounce about like 
a ball. Men fancied themselves dogs and gathered 
about a tree barking and yelping — "tree- 
ing the devil." Christendom knows the psy- 
chology of this form of adolescence in the history 
of Quakers and other sects also. But it is a 
great mistake to confound these with a Vaishnava 
trance. We have these in India still and no one 
here will mistake them for Vaishnava experiences 
of emotion. On the day of the Charak and other 
Shivait festivals low-class illiterate men do 
nearly all the things described by Hall and 
James from whose works Mr. Underwood 
has taken his extracts. On these days people 
gather by hundreds, to see these wild scenes of 
religious excitement. One man takes an incense- 
pot in his hand and runs followed by drummers 
who beat their drums aloud and other people 
gather together to form a procession. At a 
certain stage the man with the burning 
incense in his hand stops and throws his head 
from side to side violently with twitches 
of the faee and eyes. The jerking becomes so 
vijolent that the man seems to lose all conscious- 
ness, and his example is followed by several others 
who do the same thing. In Eastern Bengal they 
call it Bdilpard. After doing many things 



BAILPARA 807 

much on the lines of Mr. Underwood's descrip- 
tions they become void of their senses and remain 
for some time as dead men. When this point is 
reached, the Shivaits consider it a great success 
of their religious exercise. I have seen women 
taking prominent part in these religious exercises 
and remember very well a woman named Karuna 
in the village of Suapur in the District of 
Dacca, doing all the wild things imaginable in 
the course of Bdilpara and in religious excite- 
ment. These wild excitements, ecstatic dances 
and abnormal jerks seem to have come down 
from a very remote antiquity and are the 
relics of a barbarous age. They were to be 
found among the Greeks and other ancient 
people and among the Shivaits and the Dharma 
worshippers of this province. Only low-class* 
men at the present day are observed to 
adopt these ways during their religious festi- 
Tals. Christianity may have derived some of 
these from its contact with the religions of the 
East or from the heathen ancestors of the present 
races that dwell in Europe. I cannot say that- 
the emotional dance and trances of the Vaish- 
navas have much in common with the kind of 
things described above. In the Vaishnavic 
experiences the excitement takes a fai? mildet 
and more refined form and the excitement itself 
is brought on by subtle religious appeals con- 
veyed by songs of great poetic and' spiritual 



308 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

beauty and by an exposition of the emotional 
doctrines based on the text of the scriptures 
of the Bhakti cult. The barbaric action of the 
illiterate Shivait might have originally had some 
element of mysticism in it, but it has been re- 
duced now to a mere physical display of morbid 
religious excitement. The Vaishnavas on the 
other hand have, by scholarly exposition of their 
subtle religious philosophy, classified all experi- 
ences of emotion in such a manner that the Ashta 
Satvic BiJcm^ or the eight sorts of spiritual 
fervour according to their classifications bears 
now a scientific scrutiny and stands on the basis 
of an analytical and masterly grasp of the whole 
problem of human mentality in respect of 
tender emotions. A vast literature giving a 
scientific review of the Ashta Satvic Bihar is, va. 
existence, laying down canons for the culture of 
the emotional side of the mind. There seems 
to be hardly any affinity between the savage 
excesses of religious experience of the Shivaits 
and the cultured mysticism of the Vaishnavas 
in their respective forms at the present 
day. 

The mystic trances according to the Vaishna- 
vas are beyond the reach of an ordinary man's 
realisation. Ohaitanya's advice to regulate one's 
life before one can reach the higher plane of 
mystic bliss is comprehensive. Some of them 
I give below, 



BASIS OF EMOTION 809 

" One should be kind without hostile feelings 
towards others. He should adopt truth to be 
his greatest stay and be faultless in morals, 
magnanimous, pure in body and mind, humble, 
a universal lenefactor, calm, resigned to God, 
without desire, a controller of passions, tempe- 
rate in diet, not addicted to pleasures, giving 
honour to others, but not wishing for any himself, 
dignified, full of compassion, friendly to all, not 
given to talking, eflB.cient in work and of a poetic 
turn of mind." 

In another place his advice to the religious 
preceptors was — 

" Do not take too many disciples, do not abuse 
gods worshipped by other peoples and their 
scriptures, do not read too many books and do 
not pose as a teacher continually criticising and 
elucidating religious views. Take profit and loss 
in the same light. Do not stay there where a 
Vaishnava is abused. Do not listen to village 
tales. Do not by your speech or thought cause 
pain to a living thing. Listen to the recitation of 
God's name. Recollect his kindness ; bow to him 
and worship him. Do what he wills as a servant, 
believe Him to be a friend and then dedicate 
yourself to Him." 

The last advice is the quintessence of Vaishnava 
religious philosophy-^ ^mos nibedan or self -dedica- 
tion implies the absolute surrender of one's body 
and soul to the Deity in the spirit of a bride 



310 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

offering herself to the bridegroom. "When this 
stage is reached trances become natural to the 
devotee. So that a mere physical display or ner- 
vousness is not mistaken by the Vaishnavas for 
any high degree of spiritual advancement 

The trances of Chaitanya were often the most 
exalted sight to those who witnessed them-. The 
lover sees illusions at every stage of the inteni- 
sity of his emotions showing his kindredness with 
the poet and the lunatic. Ram seeks tidings 
about Sita in one of such felicitous moods from 
the pomegranate and mango trees and Valmiki 
gives a pathetic interest to his unmatched poetry 
by describing them. Bhababhuti keeps a conti- 
nuous flow of his charming poetry, by a descrip- 
tion of the illusions and trances of his hero, 
and Jaydev makes his Radha absorbed in her 
reveries with her gaze fixed at the lovely 
clouds which she mistakes for her da*k-coloured 
god. These tender and romantic situations 
described in literature are exceedingly attrac* 
tive. But when we find one who actually 
mistakes a tamal tree and a summer cloud for the 
god of his vision and remains for days together, 
unconscious of the material world los-t in mystic 
bliss, the poetic interest that gathers' round him 
becomes really inspiring. The creed of emotional 
religion lays stress on our capacity of realiz- 
ing god as lover — the soul of man being his 
bride. If God may be obeyed as a servant, if He 



ADMIRATlOiSr OF POETS 31 J. 

may be taken to be our father, M'here is the 
psychology that would draw its limits barring 
Him from being our lover ? To the devout 
Vaishnava He comes to win the human heart with 
a thousand flowers in the spring and shows Him- 
self in the glory of a summer cloud with the 
crown of rainbow on his head and in the autumn 
with the purple rays of the sun spreading a 
golden view that looks like a gorgeous apparel. 
He plays on his flute in the songs of the cuckoo 
and in the chirp of nightingale. He comes to 
win the human heart by presents of his sweet 
fruit baskets every season, and, in the thousand 
beauties that appear in nature, He shows us 
but a glimpse of His lovely form. Ihe devotee 
hears the sound of the anklets of His feet in the 
hum of bees and in the drone of the beetle, 
announcing His approach. 

The sight of Chaitanya's extraordinary love 
created a tempest of feeling in people, and they 
struggled to give expression to their sentiments. 
One poet says " Lo ! there he goes driven by 
emotion, as a flower by storm." Another says 
" He looks like the glorious summit of Sumeru, 
trembling under hurricane." His beauteus form 
is the favourite subject on which many have 
dwelt. Brindaban Das compares his body spotted 
with ink, when as a lad he first went to school, to 
a white flower with swarms of bees on it. One 
poet praises the beauty of his acquiline ncse and 



312 CiiAiTANYA AND HIS AGE 

another sings of his lovely eyes that became full 
of tears at the sight of flowers. Radhamohan 
the poet says " He talks with Some One not 
seen by others, — his lotus eyes are tearful and 
they betray a strange emotion." The literature 
of lyrics describing the emotions of Chaitanya is 
considerable, and we recommend our readers to 
the excellent work Gaurapadatarangini compiled 
by Jagatbandhu Bhadra and published by the 
Sahitya Parishat of Calcutta which contains 
the largest collection of these songs. 

The influence of Chaitanya on the Vaishnava 
songs is enormous. He turned the very tide of 
them from the sensuous to the idealistic course. 
TheKirtana songs after his s««»2/«s were inevitably 
introduced by Gaurachandrikas which gave a 
spiritual tone to the Radha-Krishna songs much 
more than they had possessed formerly. The 
Radha-Krishna songs are divided into several 
classes. There are some that treat of the pastoral 
life of Krishna in the midst of his fellow cow- 
herds and these are called the Gostha songs. 
There are besides those which describe the 
romantic position in which Radha and Krishna 
fell in love and these are the Purba Raga songs. 
The Doutya is the message of love sent by one 
to the other. Then comes the union or Milan. 
The stages of Milan contain the v^aried phases of 
Khandita, Kalahantarita, Bipralabdha, and Man 
in which Radha feels herself wronged and is full 



GAURACHANDrIKA 31-i 

of anger because Krishna does not come to her 
bower as expected, while she spends the night 
imagining his approach at every fall of leaves. 
The last of all is the Mathur, where Krishna 
leaves her for ever and goes to Mathura, supple- 
mented by Bhabasanmilan in which Eadha 
realises his presence in her spirit and thus finds 
him really and truly, though physically separated 
from him. I need not dwell on these different 
classes of songs, which for poetic beauty, tenderness 
and pathos, have a quite unique place in world's 
lyrical literature, fed as they are by the great 
spiritual culture of the Hindus and by Vedantic 
philosophy, which give to apparent sensuous 
descriptions a great mystic import. The Gaura- 
chandrikas are the songs describing Chaitanya's 
emotions. These songs are introduced as pro- 
logues before each class of B/adha-Krishna songs 
is sung. Each of the above classes is sung for 
four or five hours, but the inevitable prologue — 
the Gaurachandrika must be sung first. I refer my 
readers^to pp. 538-42 of my History of Bengali 
Language and Literature for a full account of the 
bearing which the Gaurachandrikas have on the 
Radha-Krishna songs. The Gaurachandrikas by 
alluding to Chaitanya's emotions give a realistic 
Interest to the Radha-Krishna songs. All sensu- 
ous matters are thus purged of materialistic 
elements and become thoroughly idealised by the 
exalted allusion; and this forms a sort of comment 
40 



iU CilAltANYA AND HlS AGE 

upon the songs interpreting'the whole in the light 

of spirituality. The audience thus become inspired' 

by the spiritual side of these songs, which 

becomes so apparent and striking that the 

romance of ordinary love only heightens the 

spiritual felicity of the musical performance. In 

the Swapnabilas and Dibyonmad by the poet 

Krishna Kamal, born in 1810, we find a systematic 

and successful attempt on the part of the poet 

to portray Chaitanya's spiritual felicities in the 

outward form of the Kadha-Krishna legend. 

Radha goes to Kunda and Juthi flower plants and 

seeks the tidings of Krishna from them, just as 

Chaitanya is said to have done, as described in 

the Antakhanda of the Chaitanya Oharitamrita. 

The vision of clouds bearing its ever-beautiful 

message to the Vaishnava devotee is attributed to 

Eadha. She trembles with joy and with joint 

hands offers praise to the clouds thinking them to 

be Krishna, for staying a while to listen to her 

laments. But the clouds pass away and when 

Krishna actually comes to her doors she weeps and 

says " Say, my maids, is it really He or merely 

the clouds? Are those the peacock feathers 

of his crown or the rainbow ? Are those that 

look like strings of pearls on his Tareast really 

so or the flocks of cranes in the distant clouds ? 

Is this his purple dress or a flash of lightning ?" 

This is the thin line beyond which the fine frenzy 

— the trance of Chaitanya often steps forth. The 



THE ALLEGORY 315 

poet began his work by saying that when the 
vision of God became clear, Chaitanya thought 
Krishna to be in the Brinda groves, but when 
the vision faded he thought Krishna to have 
gone to Mathura and so he lamented. Some- 
times Chaitanya become maddened by his 
vision and said to Swarupa "Show me, dear 
friend, once more the lovely sight or else I will 
die" and he fell unconscious on the ground. 
Thus Gaurachandrika makes the burden of the 
Radha Krishna songs quite clear, and inspite of 
all that may be urged upon by hostile critics, 
who have but a superficial idea about Indian reli- 
gion, it must be said that the atmosphere of songs 
in which the allegorical element becomes very 
prominent during a Kirtana performance is 
pure and elevative. If we treat the Vaishnava 
lyrics, as a scholar has suggested, merely as 
literature, it becomes divested of its whole wealth 
of spiritual charm and it is besides impossible 
in the present stage of the songs to disconnect 
Chaitanya's life from the Radha Krishna song^. 
For instance in many of the songs of Govinda 
Das a situation of Radha is described in which 
she is near Krishna, but laments as if parted 
from him. This is in perfect accord with the 
Vaishhavite belief that Chaitanya who was always 
with Krishna, lamented the separation in his 
frenzied condition only, in which the fact of his 
presence appeared too dearly-prized to h^ 



316 CH AIT ANY A AND HIS AGE 

beKeved. How can this situation be explained 
without a reference of the bearing which 
Chaitanya's ecstasies had on the Radha-songs ? 
In many places Chaitanya is described as resting 
on the shoulders of Narahari and Gadadhar and 
lamenting the pain of God in the most poetic 
way. Eadhamohan the poet describes Eadha as 
leaning on her maids and lamenting in the 
same strain. In the accounts of Abhishar after 
Chaitanya's scmnyas Radha is described always 
in such a way as to remind us of Chaitanya's 
leading the Kirtana profession. There are 
very direct references which cannot be inter- 
preted without their bearing on Chaitanya's 
life. 

Those whose cry is that some of the Vaishnava 
songs are erotic, lose sight of the spiritual back- 
ground against which the Radha-Krishna songs 
are set. One who attends a Kirtan performance, 
must be struck with the edifying effect 
inevitably produced on the hearers. The 
singers and their audience feel the inspiring 
presence of the spirit of Chaitanya in the Goup 
Chandrikas and altogether lose sight of this 
material world being gradually carried into the 
higher regions of Divine grace and love. One who 
has witnessed the solemnity of these perform- 
ances will not doubt for a moment the 
exalted character of the songs when properly 
interpreted. 



THE NERA NERIS S17 

Last of all we refer to the criticism which 
has been made in certain quarters regarding the 
immoral lives of lay Vaishnavas as due to a defect 
in the system of emotional religion founded by 
Chaitanya. The immodesties complained of as 
existing amongst the Sahajias and Nera Neris 
who at the present day profess Vaishnavisnl, 
should not be attributed to anything wrong in 
the Vaishnava creed ; since we have seen that 
Chaitanya and his followers from whom the 
religion emanated were stern ascetics of purest 
morals and it is not fair to suppose that from 
asceticism and purity immorality can spring, any 
more than we can expect Nim fruit from a 
mango tree. These Sahajias and Nera Neris were 
originally Buddhist Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis 
(monks and nuns) amongst whom great sexual 
vices prevailed. Instead of being an instrument 
of degenerating their morals Vaishnavism has 
reformed them to a great extent and the work 
of reformation is still going on. They were 
celibates and their profligacy is due to a fall of 
the moral standard during the declining days 
of Buddhism. Vaishnava leaders have, however, 
introduced marriage system amongst them, and 
this has gone a great way towards reforming their 
character. And if sexual vices still prevail in 
their society, they are like the dregs in a wine 
bottle — the remnants of bygone depravities, and 
the fault of this must not be fixed on the 



ai8 CHAITANTA AND HIS AGE 

Vaishnavas. That their morals had been gradually 
but steadily improving will be proved by the fact 
that the markets or fairs where women used 
practically to be sold for Re. 1-4 per head are grow- 
ing scarcer day by day. And with these people 
-*^the Sahajias and Nera Neris — the Vaishnavas 
had nothing to do formerly, though their leaders 
.out of great compassion admitted the fallen 
people within the fold of their religion. TH6 
subject will be dealt with elaborately in Chaptel* 
II of the Supplement of this book. 

We have quoted a song by the Emperor 
Akbar in honour of Chaitanya on the title page 
as our motto. In the inscriptions of Govindaji's 
temple at Brindaban the statement is found that 
Rupa and Sanatana were the Gurus of Mansingha. 
It is therefore quite natural that the Emperor 
had heard a good deal about Chaitanya from His 
favourite general and others, and conceived an 
admiration for him. Growse tells us that the 
Emperor paid a visit to Brindaban and was struck 
by the piety of the Yaishnaya Gurus. His famous 
court-musician Tansen sang before him songs in 
honour of the Hindu gods and goddesses and 
it is well-known that both had catholic views 
in respect of religion though they were Maho- 
ndedans. It will be seen that the Emperor 
in that Hindi song uses onomatopoetic ex* 
rpressions much on the lines of the songs of 
Ohandvardai. ' j 



GOVtNDA bAS*S HYMN 319 

I cannot conclude this review of Chaitanya 
and Ohaitanyism better than by quoting the fol- 
lowing verse by Govinda Das, the distinguished 
poet of Budhuri in the 16th century, 

" He gives love of God to men without their 

seeking. 
Where is the heart so magnanimous as his ? 
When he danced, the lame, the blind and the 

deaf danced with him. 
When he wept, the eyes of the world were 

blinded with tears. 
When he called ' Krishna ' ' Krishna ' aloud, 

the sound was caught by the multitude, 

and it reverberated in air from direction to 

direction. 
It is for this that I believe him to be God. 
And surely His spirit was in him, just as the 

reflection of the Sun is in the mirror." 



SUPPLEMENT 

CHAPTER I. 
Chaitanta's Religious Views. 

The Dwaitddwaitahad. 

Chaitanya gave an elaborate account of the 
Vaishnava creed to Sanatan, and to this we have 
referred in several places in the body of this boot. 
It is curious to observe that one who was entirely 
given to felicitous excesses oE emotion and always 
carried the people by an exuberence of them, 
quoted scriptural texts in supporting almost all 
his views, when in a quiet chamber he sat with 
Sanatan dictating the ' lines on which his 
book of Vaishnava Jurisprudence should be 
written. There he appeared more like a sound 
scholar and theologian than a man given to 
devotional ardour. But with all this, it appears 
that he had but little regard for Shastrie ordi- 
nances. This he explained by a parable. A poor 
man sought the help of an astrologer to tell him 
when his evil days would come to an end. He 
was told that his father had dug a cavity under 



THE PARABLE Szl 

the plinth of his sleeping-room and there stoted 
great riches for him. But the astrologer oautibh* 
ed him against seeking them in the north, soiitii 
and western plinths. Only the surface of th6 
eastern one should be superficially dug into and 
then the man would come to find the treasure. '* If 
.you dig in the south/' he said, " bees will cOme 
out in swarms and sting you. In the northj there 
is an awful black snake and in the west there 
is an evil spirit who, if disturbed, will stand in the 
way qf your getting the riches." The shasiras^ 
the heritage left by our fathers, in their different 
phases represented by the four directions, are not 
always a safeguard to rely on. By practising 
austerities, penances and methods of the yoga 
and by mortification of the body, only evil results 
may befall you. This is the meaning of the 
parable. He pointed to the direction of thfe 
light, of the rise of the sun, symbolised by the 
word '' east " in the parable and wanted that the 
spiritual soul must come in direct contact With 
G-od-^only a little communion with saintly men 
aiid the Guru would serve to awaken in him 
a religious curiosity and inspire him with devo- 
tion in his pursuit* " Superficial digging of the 
surface " is a caution against falling a victim to 
excessive book-study leading to orthodoxy in 
theological mattei?s, which was the vice of the 

age. 

He preached what has been called the Dtoadtci- 
dtomtabdd or "non-ivLaXiam within dualism." The 
41 



32^ CHAITANf A AND HIS AGE 

AdwaitabM of Sankara advocates the theory 
that Universe is identical with the Deity. The 
line of demarcation between the human soul and 
the Great Soul embracing all, is more fancied 
than real — the origin of the fancy being the 
phenomenal world denominated Maya in the 
midst of which we live. The moment we attain 
Jnan or true knowledge, the phenomenal worldj 
which is a mere illusion, passes away, and the 
little soul becomes merged in the Great Soul; 
so that all that has created the difference ceases 
to exist. The Dwaitabdd or Dualism is of course 
the ordinary theory accepted by most people, 
which promulgates that God and Man are eter- 
nally different, the latter having to rely constant* 
ly on His mercy, help and compassionate grace. 
The Dwaitddwaitahdd of Ghaitanya advocates 
Dualism in religious speculation but lays stress 
on the devotional side, saying that when faith has 
reached the state of perfection, the human 
soul forgets its own self, the eyes see 
nothing but Him — the sight of all sights, the 
Bars hear nothing but the sound of His flute, 
which fills all space, and every touch is His, The 
senses in fact instead of leading to the conscious- 
ness of many make the devotee aware of the 
presence of Him only, so absolutely, that he 
forgets his own existence. That is Chaita,nya'8 
non-dualism with in dualism, — only a refined 
form of dualism in the highest stage of 
devotion. 



BASED ON THE BRAHMA SUTRA 328 

At this stage Vidyapati's Rddhd is thus des- 
cribed in the Mathur songs of the poet " 'si^'^ 5lt*R 
5rt«R (7lt€f?!?5, =^tt Om Tf*rt^" (constantly think- 
ing and recalling her beloved — Mddhaba, the 
beautiful one turned herself into Madhaba). 
Jaydev practically had said the same thing nearly 
five centuries earlier in the line " ^i!(<(C«1tf<»'«*l"Q^- 
^teTl, 1^*j[??f5lf^ ^Ns^%11." Certainly the 
Bhagavat, the greatest scripture of the Vaishnavas, 
has a text, from which these poets took their 
idea, in which the Gopis of the Vrinda-groves so 
far forgot themselves in the excess of their devo- 
tion, that each of them considered herself 
as Krishna himself. This unity of the lesser 
soul with the Great Soul is a momentary experi- 
ence in the excess of emotion and does not 
indicate the stage of man's identity with the 
Absolute and the Omnipotent, indicated in 
the non-dualistic views of Sankara, who asserts 
that God and man become one at a certain stage 
when the phenomenal world — the Maya — is 
removed. The Brahma Sutra of Vyas hints at 
an emotional stage on which the " Dwaitddwaita- 
bdd " of Chaitanya may be said to be based, in 
the lines "'^t^'tl^^" (ff???«tt«. ^*lf^*f5tB5 " and 
**C»tfrt3i iff^WtS""- This clearly indicates that 
a devotee in the excess of his emotions may lose 
consciousness of his self and become merged 
in God, but he cannot thereby attain the 
omnipotent powers of creation and destruc- 
tion. 



324 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

The rules of conduct, — the theory of devotion, 

The codes for daily observance and for the 
training of the mind to devotion, preached by 
Chait£|,nya, are on the lines of aseeticisqi an4 
control of passions. Chaitanya advocated absti- 
nence, wished men to avoid taking rich meals 
and wearing fine apparel. He was always 
against too much study. This is perhaps 
due to the fact that at his time much pedantry 
was rampant, which, made people vain, con- 
ceited and proud. He would not allow men to 
listen to gossip or become news-hunters. He 
wpuld not believe in morality without faith. 
However acute the moral sense, however whole- 
hearted one's work, however comprehensive one's 
Jcnpwledge — they are likely to lead to error an4 
confusion, unless man makes faith his guiding 
star. The rules for guidance of one's action^ 
aye fully detailed by him in his instructions tp 
Sanatan and are to be found in Chaitanyt^ 
Cbaritamrita (Chap.— Madhya Khan4^)- 
liQQhan Das's " Durlabha Sdr," and Narottaw 
Pas's " Prembhaktichandrikd " also give us sonie 
of his views in regard to action {Karma) and 
knpwledge {Jnam) as opposed to Bhakti. 

Fyom the Buddha to Sankara, till .the time 
f(f Chaitanya, much spiritual and moral gyown4 
liad been trodden, when the human soul reajised 
that the principle of good actipn and §elf- 
qontrol could not ^e its safeguard, uptU 



THE BUDDHA AND CHAITANYA 835 

it fixed its anchor on God's love which leads tg 
the unerring perception of truth, not to he 
attained either by ' Jnan ' or ' Karma ' divested 
from faith. The latter oftentirne entangled the 
SQul in the meshes of selfishness and conceit, 

Chait^nya shov\red the force of this fatith, 
often vrithout any sermon or speech. It was 
llis eyes with tears that attracted all, it was the 
sweet face beaming with the light of mystiq 
tyfmce that acted as a charm on the multitude. 
"What country has produced such a galaxy of 
poets to sing hymns and melodious songs in 
praise of their prophets as Bengal has done in 
hqpour of Chaitanya ? The whole Vaishnava 
literature of Bengal, rich in its twenty thousand 
songs, in its conception of devotion in the 
imagery of E-adha expressed in its numberless 
F^dfis, is the flower-tribute to the feet 
pf the Nadia Brahmin, a poor ^annyasi in 
life, but the prince of her princes in the 
dPTOS'i'i o^ spirituality. The compassionate afl(| 
self-controlled majesty of the Buddha has facle^ 
3,way from this country yielding its throne to 
Qhjjitanya, whose naine -is now on the lips of 
thousands of crypto Buddhists who have emhracgd 
Vaishpavism, 

The Buddha showed us the precipitous and 
]?ickpty ladder of moral life uftsupportecj by f^ith 
Ip - scale inaccessible |ieights ever-lost in tljg 
summer clouds, but what of the naan who actually 
QP^ned the. gates of the .Region of Light an^ 



326 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

thus gave us some tangible good to be realised 
by all. Thus to-day in Bengal the blacksmith 
forgets his hammer, the ploughman his bulls 
and the good housewife of the peasant her 
husking, as a song on Chaitanya is sung by the 
peasantry, making all hearts leap forth in joy 
and adoration. 

The Buddha had laid great stress on the 
control of, nay a total extinction of passions. 
Chaitanya looked at spiritual truths from quite 
another angle of vision. He perceived that 
passions and emotions were the great motor- 
powers of the soul. God has given these to men 
for some definite object. It is their proper use 
and not misuse that would help in serving their 
purpose. In the 'Prembhaktichandrikd' by 
Narottam Das and in many other works of the 
Vaishnavas, this idea is clearly set forth. If we 
give a sharp weapon to a child, it will prove 
dangerous, but the sharp weapon is not to 
be destroyed because the child has cut his finger 
with it. 

The world is not to be renounced, nor are the 
ties that bind us to It to be given up. These 
ties are sacred, and if properly understood, lead 
us to the realisation of permanent bliss. I have 
referred to the santa, dasya, sakhya, vatsalya 
and madhurya of the Vaishnava creed of Bengal, 
as embodying the highest truths of their religion! 
I have explained some of them iu a loose and 
general manner in the body of this book an4 



iat FIVE RASAS ^27 

for the sake of a clearer comprehension of this 
moist essential doctrine of the Vaishnava, I shall 
crave your indulgence to recapitulate the points 
summed up in an article of mine entitled "The 
domestic element in the religious creeds of 
Bengal " and make the following extract from the 
concluding portion of the article.^ These five-fold 
rasas of the Vaishnavas of the Chaitanya order 
have been described by me also in my works 
" Chaitanya and his Companions " and " History 
of the Mediaeval Vaisnava Literature." 

• The Jive-fold rasas of the Vaisnavas. 

■ " The Vaishnava theology, as I have already 
stated, reached its highest point and very flower 
in the realisation of the emotional side of reli- 
gion. It boldly asserted that there was no form 
of higher faith among the world's religious 
systems which did not possess an honoured place 
in the scope of the Vaisnava doctrines. 

Pirst of all, the " quiet " or the ' shdnta' stage 
is that attained by the Buddha and other sages 
where the human soul is made clear of the 
meshes of flesh by removing the desires. The 
field is weeded out of wild plants and becomes 
fit for the sowing of the spiritual seed. The 
Vaishnavas say that the doctrine of a moral life 
belongs to this initial stage when the mind is 
placed under discipline and controL 

^ See Silver Jubilee Commemoration Volame of Sir Ajsutoah 
Mnkherjee, Fart II. 



328 CHAITANYA AND his AGE 

The next is " service " or " ddsya," where the 
devotee, after having grown fit by bringing his 
restless soul under discipline is eager to establish 
a relation between himself and his God. This 
i'elatioa is that of a servant to his master ; he 
has for his motto " duty." He considers all 
work holy in this stage and longs to hear the 
applauding word, " Well done " from his Lord 
after his day's labours. This stage, says the 
Gharitamrita, "includes the " shdnta" or 
the "quiet" and is a step forward in the 
spiritual progress of a man, inasmuch as 
he has been able now to establish some 
definite relation between himself and his 
Maker." 

The next stage in this progressive faith is 
the ' sakhya ' or " friendship." Here the devotee 
has gained another step and has come nearer to 
Him. God is now not at such a distance as the 
master is from his servant. The devotee feels that 
in this stage he has ' to play ' with his brother- 
men of the world with a heart full of love and 
sweetness, and is conscious that in this play He, 
the Lord, is always his playmate to direct and 
control the play, encouraging him when he is 
weary and protecting him from evil at every 
crisis. The devotee sees the divine smile and 
filled with love for Him, knows how to love 
others. The ^sakhya' which comprehends as 
the Gharitamrita says " all the attributes of 
' shdnta ' and ' ddsya,^ has again gained a step^ in 



THE VATSALYA 3^9 

asmach as. sweetness and love has been added to 
a mere moral sense." 

In the next higher stage comes the 'vdtsalya' 
The devotee realises God as the child. This 
may appear a mental paradox to those who 
iiave been accustomed to look upon God as 
Father only. But is not the sentiment inspired 
by the child the grandest emotion ever felt by 
a human being ? A little thing, it gives infinite 
pleasure : it shews beauty unperceived by others, 
the mother alone discovers it. Through a small 
vista the whole heaven, as it were, presents itself 
before the amazed eyes of the mother. How 
could such a wonderful thing be ever believed 
that a tigress that was ferocity itself, gathers up 
all conceivable tenderness in her eyes when 
beholding her cub ? The discovery of the beauti- 
ful new-born child in the midst of things rotten 
and decayed is a presentation to the. soul of the 
sight of One who is ever new in the universe, 
and through all the wear and tear of ages Iceeps 
up the charm of the unfading smile in all that 
we observe in this phenomenal world of ours. 
A.nd this stage comprehends, according to the 
Charitamrita " all the previous phases of shdnta, 
dd&ya and sakhya, and implies a further advance 
in the realisation of bliss. The devotee 
views the child Krishna in all that smiles 
and plays around as one who supplies a 
never-ceasing fountain of new delights to 
the soul. 
42 



380 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

The last stage is the ' mddhurya' This is 
typified by the love of man for woman. It 
includes in its scope all the attributes of 'ddsya' 
for here the devotee's hand is ever ready to 
serve; of ' sakhya,' for he is absorbed in his 
'plays' with his Divine Playfellow ; of "vdtsalya " 
for he discovers in his loving God all the beauty 
and grace which the fondest of mothers ever 
found in the face of her child and much more, 
inasmuch as every sound conveys to him a 
message from the Lord, every form a sense of 
Divine presence and every touch the warmth of 
divine contact. The devotee attains to a state 
of fine frenzy which lends the highest poetic 
significance to this material world, which 
becomes to his sense a symbol of the greatest 
spiritual bliss. The rustling wind is taken as 
indicating His approach, the dark blue sky, the 
sea and landscape become symbolic of the colour 
of the Divine Kgure. The " mMhwya " creates 
emotional felicities and a longing which are but 
imperfectly expressed in the best worldly poems 
dealing with the romance of love. 

Thus home-relations are gradually idealised 
till the highest point of emotional fervour is 
reached. Through the doorway of the servants' 
outer quarters, through the front-garden of the 
home where we play with our playfellows, our 
brothers and sisters, through sleeping-room of 
the baby where the mother watches through the 
night, and last of all through the closed door of 



tHE MODERN WORLD SSl 

the nuptial chamber — from the finite— the devo- 
tee's soul wends its- long journey towards 
the Infinite. The small windows and shutters 
of our houses open a vista commanding the out- 
look of the Illimitable. The Vaishnavas believe 
that the Incomprehensible may be brought 
within the range of human realisation — nay loved 
a thousand times more than ever a mother or a 
lover loved, and as an illustration of this they 
point to Chaitanya's life which has been woven 
into a hundred songs by their poets. 

This home-life is now about to be broken. 
The parents are no longer loved with absolute 
trust and devotion, and the baby itself scarcely 
imparts more delight to the soul than gold. 
How can the spiritual soul now realise the 
"vatsalya" as people did in the days when 
the Bhdgvata was their one, scripture? 
How can the idea of " sakhya,'^ whick to be 
spiritualised must be universal, elevate the soul, 
when the idea of brotherhood has become clan- 
nish and confined to the interest of a few named 
a nation ? How can even " ddsya " flourish, 
when the ideal of loyalty to the throne seems to 
be swept away by the whirlwind of Bolshevic 
ideas? The " mddkury a " ia now a dream far 
off from our realisation when sexual love has 
lost the saving graces of devotion and poetry 
and has been reduced to fleeting emotions ever 
delighting in new conquests. Nuptial purity 
has lost its sacreduess and many writers are 



^32 CilAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

advocating a contract system in marriage. 
" Give up " is the cry heard all around and 
nowhere does anybody say, " Come unto me 
and I will give." The sublime teaching of 
" dasya," which finds blessedness in work, 
cannot find room anywhere in the present state 
of society, where work has lost its holy motive 
and is directed to legalised robbery, and huge 
machines are being scientifically manufactured 
for the destruction of men. Who will in this 
unhinged state of people's mentality stand up 
with God's banner in his hands and say, " I will 
serve Thee, O Lord, as a devoted servant serves 
his master. I will hear Thy voice, my great 
Play-fellow, in my ' play ' with others and listen 
not to party-politics which shut off Thy voice 
from me. I will delight in Thee as the mother 
delights in her babe, as a lover delights in the 
beloved of his dreams ? " Who will rebuild the 
temples that have been broken and repair the 
Churches where the figures of Christ and Mary 
lie unadored, where some people in the frenzy 
of their excited blood even go so far as to de- 
clare that Christ came to the world with a 
sword in hand to support their cause and to 
declare it holy P The opposite party are also 
not slow in giving him the same character, and 
they invoke his co-operation in their destructive 
policy, which they also misname "righteousness." 
In this state of society all around, the peace- 
ful, sweet and all-sacrificing devotion of 



THE DOCTRINES LOST UPON US 333 

family-life which inspired most of our reli- 
gious cults with a spirit of universal love and 
brotherhood, the first lessons of which were taught 
us by those who loved us most — is a subject 
that may be held as deserving of an attentive 
consideration for rebuilding society in the light 
of all that is good and holy." 



CHAPTER II 



The Sahajias 



When a great religion with the trumpet-call 
of its latest culture and new ideal, proclaims its 
advent to the world, the old decayed creeds 
surrender themselves to the New-Comer and 
take refuge in the new temple of faith which 
thrusts open its portals of hrotherhood to all. 
But the old culture and age-long conventions 
do not die out. The new recruits retain their 
old faith under the mere name of the adven- 
turous offspring of the old wisdom represented 
by the new religion. Thus the Sufis amongst 
the Mahomedans have retained the old culture 
of the Buddhists, and in Christianity itself the 
Gaelic, Buddhist and other forms of pagan 
faith are found underlying the rituals of 
the Church. 

In Bengal a hundred different forms of the 
Buddhist faith of the Mahdyana school were pre- 
valent, when Vaishnavism sent its trumpet-call 
far and near. The leaders of thosecreeds had 
already packed up and gone to Nepal and other 
resorts of Buddhism, leaving millions of lay 
Buddhists as moral and spiritual wrecks, ex- 
posed to the contumely of the revivalists of 



SAHAJIA A COMPREHENSIVE NAME 335 

Hinduism. In these monasteries the Bhikshus 
and the Bhikshunis started the 
Buddhism. ''''^*"^''''^ the creed of Sahaj dharma 
based in some cases on 
romantic love, which seemed profanation, 
leading to sexual depravities of the grossest 
kind amongst them. The tenets which the 
author of the Vidyonmadtarangini puts in the 
mouth of a Buddhist leader trample on all laws 
of morality and shew the worst form of atheism. 
They did not believe in the human soul, in the 
sacredness of marriage-tie and in any thing 
beyond the pleasures of the present moment. 
Buddhism thus became a hated name in the 
country and those that still followed it, tried by 
all means to hide their religious societies from 
the public view. Even now the Sahajias 
(by which I comprehend the Bdul, the Nerd- 
Neris, the Kartd Bhajds and a hundred other 
sects which now represent under different names 
the broken pieces of the great marble house of 
Buddhism that once stood in full majesty in this 
land of ours) hold their meetings in secret and 
have a language in circulation amongst them- 
selves, denominated by some as the Sandhyd 
Bhdsd, not understood by people outside the 
pale of their own members. Layity in sexual 
morals is one of the features of degenerate 
Buddhism, but I cannot say that these societies 
have not in view some of the highest ideals of 
the decayed religion, Perverted and led astray. 



336 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

the ancient wisdom of monastaries still lingers 
in some of these societies but their members 
take care strictly to hide from the public. They 
develop psychic powers in a wonderful degree. 
My friend Pandit Khirod Chandra Goswami, 
a direct descendant of the Vaisnava apostle 
Nityananda, tells me that his wife had been 
suffering from a serious disease for a long time 
and was ultimately given up by the best doctors 
of Calcutta. But she was miraculously cured 
by an old woman who belonged to the Karta- 
bhaja sect. Instances of such cures have also 
been reported to me by others who have 
nothing but contempt for the people who belong 
to such secret societies. 

I have mentioned elsewhere that when 

the Bhikshus and the Bhik- 

The Buddhist join ghunis, the shaven couples 

the Vaisnava Order. ' -t 

of the Buddhist monasteries, 
were abandoned by their leaders and got 
nothing but contempt from the people of the 
Hindu Renaissance, Bir Bbadra, son of Nitya- 
nanda, gave them a shelter and converted thena 
to Vaisnava faith. This conversion, however, does 
not mean much. Eor they have retained the 
ancient forms of their rituals, mystic training and 
practices, though they call themselves Vaisnavas. 
They merely cry aloud the names of Chaitanya 
and Nityananda and there ends all their con- 
nection with Vaisnavism. They have written 
a large number of books propounding the 



VAISNAVA AllTliORITt S&f 

doctrines they follow, often in that unintelligible 
language of theirs and in all these they have 
tried to trace their doctrines to some Vaisnava 
authority of .the Chaitanya-cult, like Krisnadas 
Kaviraj, Hup and Sanatan. The doctrines of 
the latter-day Mahdyana creed, have to be 
modified to a certain extent for adaptation 
to the texts of Vaisnava works like the Chari- 
tamrita ; when they cannot contrive to do it 
and their views are in direct discord with those 
of the Vaisnava masters, they try to explain 
away the anomaly by manufacturing fables. 
They maintain that the Vaisnava masters were 
themuelves the originators of the theories pro- 
pounded by them, but for some reason or other 
the masters could not find time or opportunity to 
put them to writing in their life-time. They, 
however, communicated the gospel to some of 
their disciples from whom the Sahajias have got 
them. Thus Mukunda Das, author of Vivarta 
Vilds, is said to have been one of the disciples 
of Krishna Das Kaviraj to whom 
The process of adap- ^j-g attributed many mystic 

tatioii. , , , ' 

views which in reality belonged 
to some local form of latter-day Buddhism. 
The Sahajias would by no means confess that 
they were Buddhists, nor refer to any Buddhist 
texts which would make it far easier to trace 
the doctrines to their genuine origin. In the 
theories themselves and in their practices, many 
Buddhist rites and views have left their 
43 



338 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

indeliable marks, which my friend BabuManindra 
Mohan Bose, M.A. will disclose to you, engaged 
as he is in making research into the various 
forms of the prevailing Sahajia creed in Bengal. 
The last man in Bengal proper who openly 
declared himself to be a Buddhist, was Rama- 
nanda who wrote a Ramayan in Bengali early 
in the 18th century. But though the student of 
Buddhism will find ample materials amongst the 
Sahajia sects, he will find none among them who 
openly professes that faith, unless he visits 
Chifctagong and other border-lands of Bengal. The 
ethical standard raised by the Hindu Renaissance 
became such a complete monument of sexual 
purity that the corruption prevailing amongst the 
Sahajias was a shame which feared the exposure 
of day light and passed into the shade of their 
nocturnal societies where no outsider had 
access. The modern Sahajias themselves do not 
know that they elosely follow the Buddhist 
tenets, their ancestors concealed the fact when 
they were admitted to the Vaishnava order, 
while following them still in their rituals ; and 
at the present stage it is the duty of a historian 
and scholar to thresh out grains from the 
chaff and find out the true Buddhist elements 
in their views and practices. 

These Sahajias of the various sects, who 
outwardly profess the Vaishnava religion, 
present a very large number in Bengal. 
Mr. Ward in his work on the Hindoos says 



RECRUITS FROM ALL RELIGIONS 339 

that nearly one-fifth of the whole Bengali nation 
are Vaishnavas. By far the largest portion of 
these are the Sahajias. Their literature is very 
considerable. If we examine the different libraries 
of old Bengali manuscripts in the country, it 
will be seen that there is scarcely a bundle of a 
dozen leaflets and books, which have not 
in them some treatise or brochure on the 
Sahajia cult. It is an immense literature^ 
far greater numerically than any one could 
think of ten years ago. The spiritual truths 
they disclose often come to us like a marvel ; it 
shews that the lowest classes 

Their activities. js -x i i 

of our community have been, 
in touch with some of the greatest discoveries 
in the theological and spiritual domain. They 
set forth canons and theories with a boldness- 
which is really amazing. The upper classes of 
our country are orthodox, but they are not 
at all so. They have always remained open 
to conviction and are ready to follow new light 
if an appeal on religious questions is made to 
them in an intelligent and feeling manner. 

The proselytising work they are doing is 
wonderful. They do not put any stress on any 
special religion which would serve to limit the 
scope of their work. They gather recruits from 

all religions. There are Maho- 

The nniversal charao- r^i • •• i -r. , 

ter of their Order I deve- mcdaus, Christians and Brah- 

lopment of occult powers. , a xi -it 

^ mms amongst them, Very 

Qften the members of depressed castes take the 



340 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

lead in their society and are accepted as Gurus ; so 
that even a cobbler claims homage of self- 
surrender and utmost humility from his Brahmin 
disciples. In the atmosphere of this country, 
where stringent caste rules have such a' hold on 
the people, the societies created by the 
Sahajias are free from all caste-prejudices, 
the Brahmins, Christians, Mahomedans and the 
depressed castes eat at the same table, and often 
the texts of their faith are furnished by the 
Koran and not rarely by the Bible. The Hindu 
scriptures of course have their due respect and 
attention, A Kartd-bhaja or a Baul (the different 
sorts of Sahajia) may be a Hindu, a Mahomedan 
or a Christian, but that is no bar to his enjoying 
perfect fellowship with the members of his sect 
in their secret societies. Caste, rank in society 
and orthodoxy of views are out of question 
there. They are disciples of a Guru and in 
that capacity meet together — ready for any 
sacrifice or duty which the Guru may enjoin on 
them. Would it be believed that those, who in 
the day time pass as good orthodox Brahmins, sit 
in the nocturnal meetings with the Mahomedans 
and eat beef without the least scruple. I 
do not mean to say that in every society of the 
Sahajias this is the case. These local societies 
under different names and forms have special 
codes for guidance and there are such of 
them where beef is freely used by the Hindus 
and Mahomedans alike. They put stress upon 



BABA AUL 341 

the training of the physical system in man and 
the psoychic powers developed by Yoga practices. 
Profession of religion, they hold to be merely 
a superficial thing. The training of body and 
mind is the most essential question and in that 
there is no Hindu, no Mahomedan, no 
Christian. It is curious to observe that 
this country rent by caste-distinction and 
crushed by orthodoxy has within her fold a 
very large number of people, possessed of 
a special wisdom, who entertain the utmost 
freedom in thought in religious and social matters. 
They are under the banners of a cult that has 
subordinated all the religions prevailing in the 
country to a life of training, — mystic and 
unknown, — and progressed towards a surprising 
unification of men of different creeds and 
conflicting religious views. 

I will give here a brief account of the leaders 
and other particulars of the more important sects 
of the Sahajias. 

In the village of Ula (near Santipur) there 

lived a man of the Barui caste, named 

Mahadev. One morning in February, 1694 

A.D., he happened to meet a 

The Karta-bhajas. , , . ,. ij r. , 

lad, eight years old, who seemed 
to possess bright talents but who would by no 
means disclose his name or whereabouts. Mahadev 
Bdrui brought the boy to his home where he lived 
12 years. Then he sojourned for seven years in 
different countries and in his 27th year appeared 



342 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

in a place called Bejra in 1715, and here he 
shewed some wonderful powers by which he 
attracted disciples. He was called " Baba Aul," 
This was not his name but title, signifying 
" the mad father." Baba Aul preached his creed 
to 22 disciples, chief amongst whom were Hatu 
Ghosh, llamsaran Pal, Nitai Ghosh and a few 
others. The current song in the countryside 
describing Baba Aul runs as follows. 

" Oh whence has this strange man come ? 

" Without anger, ever-content he always says 
'Tell the truth.' 

" There are twenty-two men with him — they 
are all one mind and soul. 

" They raise their hands up and sing to- 
gether — 'Praise to our master' and are full of 
love for all. 

" And he, their chief, restores life to the dead, 
gives back what is lost and at his word the rivers 
become dry." ^ 

Baba Aul Chand died in 1769 at a village 
called Boali. Bamsaran Pal with seven other 
followers of Aul cremated him at Parari, six 
miles to the west of Chakradaha. Bam Saran 
became the Guru of the sect, after Baba 
Aul. 

•si^ Tt^c^ c^, Ifl^ cs\'i, ^«t 'i:?! ' I'sj ^ ' I 

4^ iwr^i^*! Bj^, 1^ 'Si'^^, ^^#1 ^, ^t?^, ^tu c«toi ^m I 



THE INiTATION 34S 

This sect admits Hindus, Mahomedans and 
Christians to its fold without any distinction 
whatever. Sexual morality is strictly enjoined, 
though among most of these sects, it is more 
honoured in breach than in observance. But 
we shall dwell upon this point hereafter. The 
ordinary rule in this respect is embodied in 
this couplet : — 

" Let one, whether man or woman, first be- 
come an eunuch or a hermaphrodite, and then get 
admittance to the order of the Karta Bhajas." ^ 

The rule of initiation is simple. It requires 
a promise on the part of the initiated to con- 
form to what is laid down in the following 
convers?ition between the Guru and his disciple. 

The Guru (called Mahdsay by this sect). — 
" Will you be able to act in conformity 

with the doctrines of our creed ?" 
The disciple (called Barati). — " Yes, Sir." 
The Gturu. — " You must give up lying, you 

must not steal, you must not commit 

adultery, you must not also mix too 

much with women. 
The disciple. — "No, Sir, I will not do 

any of these things." 
The Guru. — " Say to me — ' You are true, 

your words are true.' " 
The disciple. — " You are true, your words 

are true." 



341 CHAITANVA A:fJD HtS AGE 

Then the Guru gives him a certain mantra 
for recitation enjoining strict privacy in regard 
to it. 

The mantra is to this effect. — 

" Oh my Guru, Baba Aul, I am always in 

thy company, not a moment I am 

without thee, I am always with 

thee." 

The desciple is enjoined to observe the 

following rules : — 

In respect of body — to avoid adultery, 
theft and murder. 

In respect of the mind— to avoid a wish 
for adultery, a wish tb steal and a wish 
to murder. 

In respect of the tongue — to avoid lie, 
unpleasant talk, vain talk and talking 
a good deal. 

There were many Mahomedan Gurus in this 
sect and good Brahmins eat refuse from the 
plates of these Gurus. This is what Babu 
Akshoy Kumar Datta wrote 50 years ago, and I 
believe the state of things continues to this day. 
The principal seat of this sect is at Ghoshpdrd — 
a village near Calcutta. Here thousands of 
disciples meet every year on the occasion of 
the Grand MeM that sit there in April. The 
Guru is believed by his disciple to be his God. 
They believe Aulchand to be an Incarnation of 
Ghaitanya. 



THE VIEWS OF THE BAULS 345 

The Neras and the Bauls do not shave ; they 
seldom wash themselves. They 
Banis.* ^'** *"^ *^^ behave like mad men outward- 
ly. Their object in doing so is 
to shew that they are absolutely beyond the 
prejudices and conventions of the ordinary people 
living in society, They do not believe in 
images. On one occasion I had asked a !Baul if 
he worshipped any image of Chaitanya for whom 
he shewed such devotion. He smiled and said 
" How can one worship any image of Chaitanya 
when he is without any form ? " He used the word 
" Stmya Murti. " Curiously the word is exactly 
the same as we find in the religious code of a class 
of Mahayanists who assert that " The Void " is to 
be contemplated. Their motto is " ^t^^ ^ ^1J, 
«t^ *rt^ J3^"Q " which means that what is not in 
the human body, exists nowhere in the universe, 
The body is the epitome of the whole world. 
Just as the tree is in the seed, so the universe 
lies in a state of embryo in the human body. Its 
powers are capable of infinite development by 
mystic processes of which they profess to have 
knowledge. They do certain things which are 
abominable to mention and abominable to hear, 
though they give their own explanation for their 
conduct. In fact they try to rise above pre- 
judices and conventions of every sort and to 
court populaf contempt as if to keep themselves 
in secluded glory and , aloof from the rest of 



346 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

mankind — content with their own mystic and 
esoteric knowledge : One of their principles is 
" C^ viif! C6TW5t^, >n[^^5^ ^KS "il^W^." (When 
living among men conform to their rules — hut 
when in the circle led hy the Guru, no caste, no 
rule.) A class of these people totally idealise 
sexual love, by which, they hope to reach the 
highest spiritual plane. But this idea is enter- 
tained and practised by many sects of the 
Sahajias and we shall speak of it at some length 
in this discourse. 

The Ramballavi sect sprang into existence 
as a protest against the Karta- 

The Bamballavis. i i • , , , . , .. 

bhaja sect, to which its 
founders originally belonged. Krishna Kinkar 
Guna Sagar and Srinath Mukhopadhyay were 
once its leaders. They were inhabitants of Bans- 
beria in the District of Hughli. They believe 
in the scriptures of the Hindus, Mahomedans 
and Christians and cull out their doctrines from 
the Gita, the Koran and the Bible alike. All 
classes of men, including Christians and Maho- 
medans sit in the circle and partake of beef 
and other profane food offered to their altar 
without caring for caste. 

Another sect the Saheb Dhani, called so 

after the name of its founder. 

The Saheb Dhani. _ • i j - 

flourished for a long time at 
Shaligram, Dogachia and other villages in the 
district of Erishnagar. They do not worship 



THEY ACT AS MAD MEiSf 347 

images, and caste is no bar with them. Hindus 
and Mahomedans are served from the same, 
plate in their circle and become bound up by the 
utmost ties of fellowship and good will under 
a Guru. 

The Darvesh sect, said to have been founded 
by Sanatan, includes this pre- 

The Darreahis. , „ _, c- . ,_ 

cept. "C^ ft^ C^?l1 ^«1*<H I 
f^MlflC^ ^? ^#lf% sffl" (No difference between 
a Hindu and a Mahomedan, let all mix together 
as brethren under the banner of our Guru Saiji). 
The curious sect of sdddhmi is openly in revolt 
with all that is laid down as rules of conduct' 
in human society. They talk like mad men; 
in a language which appears jargon to us. 
They behave like mad men. And if any- 
body approaches them, they abuse him in 
a vulgar language, so that they may be left 
undistiirbed in their course. They openly eat 
food served by all men, irrespective of caste. 
They live as celebates all their life. They will 
not sleep in the same place every night, entirely 
relying on what food or sleeping accommodation 
chance may bring them. 

The Sahajia sect is for indiscriminate mixing 

of men and women. In doing 

before them, which they profess to follow, but 
is transgressed at every step. Women elect 
their own Chtru. But this Guru need not be 



348 CHAITANYA AND HIS AG^ 

one. Living under the guidance of a Guru for 
the time being, she yields herself entirely to him, 
body and soul, and her motto is " ^?F ^?f^ »|v5 "^ 
ia 'Rf^ Tt^ I ^ IWl^l fw^ ?t^ t^ ^ ll" ("We 
will make a hundred Gurus but follow one 
Mantra which is to be the essence of life. He 
who will capture our heart, we will belong to 
him.y 

The Khusi Biswasi sect was founded at a 
village called Bhaga near 

The Khusi Biawasis. -rv . , , j • j. • i. j. 

Devagram m the district of 
Krishnagar. Khusi Biswas, who was a Mahomedan, 
had a large following of Hindu and Mahomedan 
disciples by whom he was believed to be an 
incarnation of Chaitanya. Khusi Biswas enjoined 
absolute surrender of his followers to himself. 
His call is to this effect. " If in distress or 
trouble do pray unto me. And if / have any 
One, I will pray to that One for you." 

The founder of the Balarami sect was one 

Balaram — a Hari by caste, 

The Balaramis. ^ ■, ... n ^t ■< , • 

Which is one of the lowest in 
the Hindu Society. Balaram was born in the 
year 1785 in Malapara — a ward of the village 
Meherpur in the district of Nadia. He was a 
chcmkidaf in the employ of the well-known 
Malliks of the village and was once suspected 
of theft, which he had not committed. He gave 
up the post in disgust and sojourned in different 
parts of Bengal, and when after long years he 



BALARAM HARl 34.& 

returned, he proclaimed himself to be God 
Almighty. The boldness of the illiterate man 
was immense. By his pithy eccentric sayings, 
he often hit at great truths which came as 
surprise to the Brahmins. It is said that no one 
ever heard him tell an untruth. On one occasion 
the Brahmins of the locality were performing 
tarpan in Ganges. This was the custom of 
taking handfuls of water from the river 
and throwing it down, by which acts they 
believed, the thirst of their departed ancestors 
would be allayed. Balararo attracted the 
attention of the Brahmins by taking hand- 
fuls of water like them and throwing it on 
the bank. When asked the reason, he said; 
" If your water will go to your departed fore- 
fathers who are far away, mine ought to go 
to my vegetable garden which is only a mile 
from here and certainly not so remote as the 
land of the dead." Balardm has left a treasure 
of spiritual songsj couched in the patois of the 
country. They are simple and direct home- 
thrusts levelled at the superstitions and conven- 
tions of the Hindus. 

There are many sects in Western Bengal 

to which may be given 

Minor sects. ^jjg general denomination of 

"Sahajia" besides those mentioned above. 

The Hazrati, the Oohmi and the PagalmtU 

were founded by Mahomedans, though the 



860 CHAItANYA ANt> HlS AGE 

bulk of their followers were Hindus. Tilakdasi, 
Spastabadi, and Darpandraycmi are also impor- 
tant from the point of faith they preach, 
Hazrat was a native of Bansbaria, a mile to 
the east of Ghoshpara, Gobra belonged to the 
village of Muradpur and Pagalnath to Nagda, 
and Darpanaryan was a cobbler in Santipur,' 

In Eastern Bengal there are still many such 
sects about whom we have got some informa- 
tion. In a village named Xharar Char near 
Rowile in the District of Dacca, there lived 
Panchu Fakir who had a large following of 
Hindu and Mahomedan dis- 

Fanchu Fakiri. . , ,, ■, -,• 

ciples ; the healmg power 
possessed by this man was highly admired 
and appreciated, and his services were frer 
quently required by even the enlightened 
and aristocratic families of the locatity. He 
died only lately. At a village named Mainat 
in the same district there is another Maho- 
medan Fakir who is a preacher of the mystic 
doctrines of the Sahajia creed, much appreciated 
by people, and his followers are increasing 
every j-ear. In Jessore Pagla Kanai, the lyri- 
cal beauty of whose songs elicited admiration even 
from distinguished men of letters, died within 
a few decades. This man was perfectly 
illiterate, but the songs that he composed are 

' Mnch of (he above is taken from Babu Akshoy Kumar Datta'B 
ITpasaka Samprpdaya. 



THE HIGH STATUS OF THE GURU 351 

characterised by a keen perception of spiritual 
truths. He has left a vast number of follow- 
ers who culture mystic powers on the lines 
of the Sahajias. 

There are hundreds of these sects silently 

working in Bengal, and of whom we have only a 

superficial idea. We have, however, secured some 

accounts of their religious veiws, the treatment of 

which is reserved for a future 

The Buddhist elements, j i? n j • iv, 

and fuller discourse on the 
subject. The educated community of Bengal have 
up to now, kept themselves quite aloof from 
these indigenous developments, but there is 
no doubt that some of these have attained an 
astoundingly flourishing condition in recent 
times. The other day I counted roughly the 
number of the prophets of Bengal who are 
still living or died a few years ago only, and 
they amounted to about fifty. Each of these 
prophets has a large number of followers, Hin- 
dus and Mahomedans, who are counted by 
hundreds and thousands. They believe in him 
entirely as the Christians believe in Christ and 
the Mahomedans, in the Prophet. The reli- 
gion they propound is some phase of the old 
Buddhistic wisdom, the lessons of which lie 
deep-rooted in the soil, and which have not 
been forgotten by the masses. If properly 
enquired into, these creeds will disclose the con- 
pection which they evidently have with one 



352 .CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

or the other of the different schools of Maha- 
yanism of the Madhyamic school, founded by 
Nagarjoon in the first century of the Christian 
era. The doctrines are imbued with those of 
the different schools of Indian philosophy and 
present a hotch-potch of various elements of 
Indiail spiritual speculations and age-long iantric 
practices. 

The predominating Buddhist idea in (he 
doctrines is apparent. The sects are generally 
opposed to caste. In the matter of eating cook- 
ed food, where strict orthodoxy is observed by 
the various sects of the Hindu — nearly all 
these sects are without any prejudice, and their 
indiscriminate behaviour at the dining table 
reminds one of the custom prevailing at Puri, 
once the greatest shrine and resort of the Bud- 
dhists. In many places the Sahajia refuses to eat 
the meal-offering made to Chaitanya, nor does 
he bow to the latter's image, though he calls 
himself a member of his apostolic Order. 

During the Brahmanic Renaissance, achdr or 
observance of rules of conduct was recognised as 
the first quality. The achdr includes rules of 
eating and daily practices of certain religious 
rites. In fact achdr was considered to be the 
most important of the nine qualities to be en- 
titled to Kulinism, or a position of honour in 
the social scale. This was evidently laid down 
in view of the extreme lawlessness which 



CURATIVE POWER 353 

characterised decaying Buddhism. The feature so 
prominent in the Sahajia sects is to revert to 
the original recklessness of decayed Buddhism 
and a complete upsetting of our social fabric. 

One of the great merits of the tantrio 
Buddhism was the curative power of those who 
were said to have developed certain psychic 
powers of the soul. At the present day, the 
old conventions of power by touch, hypnotism 
and mesmerism are gaining strength under 
scientific names. The different sects of the 
Sahajias in the countryside have this special 
feature that the adepts are endowed with some 
hidden and occult powers which they do not 
explain to those outside their own circle. For 
the purpose of bringing their body under full 
control and discipline, they perform many 
mystic rites which the followers of each of 
these sects take care to hide from others. The 
elaborate quotations I have made from the work 
" Jnanadi Sadhana " in my Typical Selections 
from old Bengali Litrature (Part II, pp.] 630— 37) 
will clearly show the Buddhistic element in 
them. Though owing to these sects owning a 
very considerable number of Hindu popula- 
tion as their members, their creed appears in some 
essential points Hindu in character, they often 
in a clear and undisguised language revile the 
Brahmins and the Vedas (p. 1632). Arid curiously 
though they call themselves Vaishnavas, they 
45 



354 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

do not believe in any image of Krishna (p. 1632) to 
which fact I have already made a reference. 
Though living in society, many of these creeds 
have no faith in sexual morality, nay some of 
them openly discard it in favour of free love, which 
they take to be a higher ideal in sexual matters 
for the culture of emotion than the marriage- 
bond, but this will be discussed hereafter. 

In Nepal the Buddhists are called Ouhhajus, 
or followers of Gurus and the Hindus Devaj'm 
or followers of the Devas — the gods. The one 
common feature of the Sahajia creeds is the 
implicit surrender of self to the will of the 
Gurus on the part of their disciples. This trust 
in the Guru is so great that a wife will sometimes 
accommodate herself to the will of the Guru 
without the least scruple, if the latter happens 
to be a bad man, even when her husband is living. 
This implicit faith in the Guru is the character- 
istic of the Buddhists of the Mahayan school. 
The Sahajia disciple pays an annual tax to the 
Guru as rent of the house he dwells in, by 
which term he implies his body, of which the 
absolute master is the Guru, formally ac- 
knowledged as such at the time of initiation. 
This tax the Guru gets for the permission 
he gives to his disciple to dwell in his 
body. 

The ideal of love which some of the Sahajias 
preach is a dangerous game, as Chandidas 



Man higher than goIos 355 

the poet, himself a Sahajia, declares in many 
^ of his poems. The poet Says 

The Seznal Bomance. x » 

that no God is to he Wor|Jiipped, 
hut Man or "Woman. There is no god or goddess 
in heaven who can teach spiritual truths more 
than the person whom one loves with the whole 
heart. In fact this was the mandate which 
the poet received from the goddess BashuU 
whom he worshipped. She is said to have told 
him " Stick to your love, she, the washer-woman, 
will teach you higher truths than I or a 
hundred gods and goddesses like me can teach 
you. Even Brahma, the creator will not be 
able to lead you to that heaven of bliss which 
Rami the woman will help you to reach." 

An adept in the Sahajia-cult explained to 
me why the worship of images cannot elevate 
the heart to that heaven of bliss to which human 
love can lift it up. The images accept whatever 
is offered, at least the worshipper supposes it so. 
Even a decoit or thief may discover by his devo- 
tion a smile on the lips of the image, as if ap- 
proving the sort of life that he may lead. But if 
on the throne of an image, you place a man or 
woman, the situation will be a complicated and 
difficult one. At the first sight the lover 
captivates the heart by unfolding many charms 
and seems to be perfection itself. But as you 
proceed and put up with him or her, the defects 
of the person's character will gradually become 



S56 CilAITANYA AND HIS AGlS 

glaring and by living together a while, all novelty 
will pass away in most cases, often giving rise 
to a feeling of vexation and disgust. But a 
particular sect amongst the Sahajias enjoin 
that you should continue to love inspite of 
everything. Their motto is " One who loves and 
then leaves does not get the spiritual culture of 
emotion. At the outset choose your man or woman 
and pay your heart's homage to the person. What- 
ever ill you may receive from the lover, you 
are to bear with smile. You should not get 
vexed although the person may 

The philosophy of or J 

their love. give you a hundred causes for 

it. That one's joy will be 
your joy and you will absolutely forget yourself 
and abide by that person's will surrendering 
your own will. When you have accomplished 
this you will be able to reach that One who 
pervades the whole world." My informant was 
an aged woman, and I asked of her. "If she be a 
woman and wife, and the person for whom she 
professes love wants the surrender of her body ?" 
She said in reply, " When her lover is her God, 
she must give her all without reserve. Forget 
all social conventions when you deal with the 
ideal of the Sahajias. If the man wants 
her body, she must give it, but with this 
difference that she will delight only in the joy 
which she will afford to her lover, and shall 
absolutely be indifferent to the gratification 



THEIR IDEAS NOT CONVENTIONAL 357 

of her senses," She referred to a line of 
Ohandidas which says " ^^ ^t^ ^■^ Ctf^C^ <(>|^t^ 
^ " (this body should be reduced to the state 
of a dry log) and said the body will be beyond 
its physical plane of pleasure or pain and it 
should be merely a vehicle of the spirit dedicated 
to the worship of her lover." 

These Sahajias do not believe in the 

established'ideals of womanhood represented by 

Sita, Savitri and the suttees who burnt themselves 

with their dead husbands in the days bygone — 

as living examples of their absolute devotion. 

The woman from whom I learnt the particulars, 

told me " These examples from your Hindu 

scriptures and epics fall short of the love-ideal 

of the Sahajias. These wives were actuated by 

hopes of getting rewards in the next life and 

praises from society in this for their chaste life. 

How far they were actuated by love cannot be 

determined in view of the complex character of 

the sentiments which prompted them in doing all 

that they did. If a woman foregoes the ties of 

family, receiving nothing but contempt of society 

and surrenders herself absolutely to her lover at 

the sacrifice of every other consideration — that 

love is admittedly pure and unalloyed gold, 

standing the test of all analysis. The lover may 

spurn her, assault and betray her and prove false 

in a hundred ways — but she must bear all ills 

and cleave, not with mere patience, but train her 



S58 CHA1TA.NYA AND HIS AGE 

mind so as to consider her misfortunes and sor- 
rows as joys — gifts from her dear lord. The 
devotee takes his worldly pain, as divine dispen- 
sation and bears it with joy. This should be the 
Sahajia- standpoint in regard to emotions of 
a lover. This is recommended not merely in the 
case of a woman bu.t also for a man. Says Ohandi- 
das, " He that loves and breaks is not privileged 
to have that training which leads to one's 
spiritual well-being." Divorce is not recog- 
nised in the ethical code of a Sahajia. " Love 
first, love always " is the motto here. Love here 
is religion, its range is infinite patience, infinite 
joy out of infinite sorrow. The phraseology of 
society is to be changed, all foul is fair here, 
all pain joy. 

This creed so dangerous, is not recommended 
for the average men and women. 

1 he Sahajias do not ,, ^ .... ,, ^v j. 

mean their love-oreed " In a million, SayS Chaudl- 

*" ""■ das, " there may be found one 

man up to the mark " — the rest will be ruined. 
Chandidas cautions men and women against 
coming to try their strength in this sphere of 
spiritual training, though he himself was a 
Sahajia. He says, " Let him come, who can make 
a frog dance in the mouth of a serpent or can 
hang a mountain by the fine thread of a cobweb." 
This means that it is an impossible height to 
scale for one who has not absolutely conquered 
his body. He alludes to innumerable instances 



LOVE IDEALISED 859 

where youths and maidens were attracted by the 
romantic creed of the Sahajias, but by far the 
greatest number of whom became utter wrecks 
and eternally damned. It appears from Chandi- 
das' writings that this form of the Sahajia creed 
does not require a mere culture of emotion. The 
lovers are required to do some mystic practices 
for regulation of breath by which a control over 
the mind and a conquest over the flesh might 
be achieved. We are not conversant with the 
language of Yoga and therefore cannot interpret 
the teachings. For the culture of love without 
sensuality, the lover is required to sit whole, 
nights on the bed of the object of his love for six 
months, without touching her, enjoying her 
sight ; for the next six months to do so by touch- 
ing her feet. At a certain stage the lovers 
must live apart from one another, and perfect 
freedom must be given to them to mix with 
other people and the personality of one indivi- 
dual must not be allowed to exert an undue 
power over the mind. Through all these trials 
the mind must be in an atmosphere of perfect 
freedom and face temptations. If devotion is 
proved inspite of all these, the next higher stages 
should be attempted. The Yoga practices — 
added to this, will facilitate and expedite the 
attainment of their goal — the reaching of the 
Sahaja desha — the heaven of the Sahajias, which 
is nothing but a stage of bliss, the region of 



860 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

beatitude. To the purely materialist mind, this 
will appear as utter nonsense, — where is the time 
and patience for all these absurdities for a man 
busy with jute-business, counting figures in an 
Insurance Office, or actively preparing statistics 
for administrative work ? But here lies the differ- 
ence between East and "West, I might as well say 
that a man who sacrifices his life to attempt to 
discover the Arctic regions is extremely foolish ! 
In the spiritual world, whether result be success 
or failure, no risk, no sacrifice has daunted the 
Orient, as in the physical plane, the occidental 
mind has followed pursuits at any risks which 
appear as the pursuit of phantoms to many 
people. The Sahajia creed is pernicious so of 
as it misleads and has misled hundreds of young 
men and women, and we must join with Chandi- 
das in condemning those who recommend it to 
the youth of our society. But it should not be 
forgotten that it is a system which is complete 
with its canons and codes, based on yoga — which 
is a sealed book to us ; and if we are to hang it, 
we must give it a hearing, besides the judge must 
acquire fitness for trying his case. That some 
people have scaled the heights contemplated by 
this religion of love will be obvious from the facts 
in the life of the poet Chandidas, of Abhiram 
Swami who flourished in the 11th century, and 
of Billwamangal Thakur who lived about the 
same time. That in Bengal hundreds of men 



DURGA PRASA'D EAR 861 

and women are attracted by the romantic nature 
of the creed up to this day and some of them at 
least have, in recent years, attained their goal will 
appear from the perusal of a book called the 
' Sddhu Charit ' by Babu Achyut Oharan Chau- 
dhury of Mayna, Kanaibazar, Sylhet. This book 
is the memoir of a departed Vaisnava saint of 
the Sahajia sect, whose home is now a shrine 
visited by hundreds of pious men and women. 
The name of this Sddhu was Durga Prasdd Kar 

and he belonged to the village 
Ssbajia ^sddhu prac- of Khcma Sahasra in Fargana Ita 

m Sylhet. His father was Han 
Ballava Kar and mother Shanta Dasi, — Kayasthas 
by caste. Durgaprasad was born in the year 1851. 
Achyut Babu, the biographer of Durgaprasad, 
relates many incidents in the life of the Sddhu, 
shewing his devotion and asceticism of character. 
He loved or rather worshipped a woman named 
Manomohini, with an ardour which, in its first 
stageSj none but himself knew of. This love 
proved not only the essence but the motive-power 
of his spiritual life — and curiously even Mano- 
mohini herself knew nothing of it for many years. 
He implicitly carried out the least wish of the 
woman and delighted in eating food from the 
plate from which she had eaten first. This 
caused some scandal and Manomohini, who was 
a neighbour distantly related to Durgd Prasdd, 
would not tolerate this conduct in the young 
46 



362 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

man. Durgd PrasM meanwhile had taken 
the vow of silence^ but every morning and 
evening he called on her to pay his prcmdm, 
staying for a minute there. At noon day 
(he took his meal only once a day) the mute 
Sddhu stood at the gate of Manomohini, who 
ate a little from the plate which he placed 
before her, and then he returned home and 
ate the remaining food. The scandal to which 
I have referred was not of any grave character, 
as every man in the village was perfectly aware 
of the stainless morals of both- these persons. 
But "Why should she," the people said, "tolerate 
the maniac to pay his prcmdm every day to 
her and why should she take any food from 
his plate?" On a certain day the shy lady 
took fright and refused to come out when the 
Sddhu presented himself before her. I will 
here quote an extract from the memoir. 

"Our Sddhu against the express wish of 
Manomohini still waited at noon that day, with 
a plate in his hand hoping that she would par- 
take a little of the food, that he might after- 
wards eat the rest. Manmohini came out 
and abused him in a rough language. As 
he stood still mutely gazing at her, she did 
not stop there, but cruelly threw away the 
food from the plate and went her way. 

" There was no reason why she should be- 
have thus roughly, but being vexed with the 



THE FAST d6d 

scandal she had taken the vow never to tolerate 
this any more. She did this deliberately that 
day to discourage his mad excesses. 

" The Sddhu (a youth 24 years old), who 
had taken the vow of silence, departed with the 
empty plate and did not touch any food that 
day. He looked pale and weary, and his brothers 
guessed from his looks and learnt on enquiry 
that he had not taken any food. They brought 
him milk and fruits but could not persuade 
him to eat. Three days passed in this way 
and Durgd Frasdd continued his fast un- 
moved by the earnest requests of his kith and 
kin. His relations appealed to Manomohini 
and tried to bring her to him, but her reply was 
cut and dry. "What does it matter to me if 
some one eats or does not eat? What do I 
know of it ? Do not trouble me with any request 
on behalf of that man." The relations of Durgd 
Prasdd returned home in disappointment and two 
days more passed but the Sddhu 's fast was not 
broken. His two brothers in great distress 
remembered their aunt who had a great in- 
fluence on their brother. But she lived at a 
place which would take two days to reach from 
their village. The brothers, however, took him 
in a boat and arrived at their aunt's village 
on the third day. During their journey, all their 
attempts to make him take food failed, so 
that when he arrived at his aunt's, he had already 



364 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

fasted seven days. The brothers stayed there 
for three days but the good old woman's lamenta- 
tions and entreaties proved of no avail. 
Durgd PrasM could not be induced to eat any- 
thing. In great disappointment and grief his 
brothers brought him back to their home 
and two days more passed in the way. So that 
Durg4 Prasdd had now fasted 14 days." 

Jhe biographer here says " How could this 
be possible ? An ordinary man, if he fasts for 
a day, sees every thing dark around him. 
How could Durgd Prasdd live having fasted 
14 days ? This seems almost inconceivable, yet 
it was a fact beyond all doubt, witnessed by 
many who are still living." 

The good people of the village took alarm 
at this point. A youth whose morals were 
unimpeachable, who by great austerities and 
piety had already attained the fame of a saint 
in popular esteem, was going to die of starva- 
tion, and this they could not bear to think of. 
They all went in a body on the evening of the 
14th day of the SMhu 's fast to Manomohini's 
house and appealed to her to save the life 
of the young man. Her heart had secretly 
bled at all this event, and now when the people 
of the village made the request she gladly went 
to the Sddhu's house in the following morning 
and partook of the meal prepared at hii^ 
house and gave Durgd PrasM her plate from 



Word o^ god 365 

which he gladly ate the remaining food. For 
some time Manomohini was gracious, but off and 
on she treated him cruelly refusing him the 
privilege of prandm and not agreeing to eat 
the first handful from his plate. Numerous 
instances of this sort have been mentioned by 
the biographer of the Sddhu. While fully 
recognising the delicate position of a Hindu 
woman and of her repugnance to pander to the 
queer fancies of an outsider to her home, we 
cannot help feeling compassion for the great 
sufferings caused by his unswerving devotion and 
his great forbearance. 

Durgd Prasad's course of spiritual training 
seems almost inconceivable at the present day 
of rationalism. For a time he accepted every 
man's command as the word from the Most High. 
At this stage he still observed the vow of 
silence. One evening a man named Kalicharan 
Tarafdar wanted to try the extent of his 
spiritual forbearance and patience. He brought 
him to his dirty cow-shed and ordered him to stand 
up there for the whole night. It was thundering 
and raining all around, and the straw-roof leaked 
so profusely that the Sadhu was completely 
drenched. The stench of the cow-dung and 
the buzzing sound of a thousand gnats 
which covered his whole body and drank his 
blood could not move this picture of patience 
in human shape ; the midnight passed, and 



366 CHAlTANYA AND HIS AGB 

he was still standing motionless in that hell, 
considering the word of Kalicharan Tarafdar 
as divine mandate. But the heart of this man 
at last relented and fearing lest his conduct 
would bring down God's curse on him, he came 
to the cow-shed at 1 a.m. and released the poor 
Sddhu from his sad predicament. 

Many miracles are related of this man, but 
I consider the above instances of the patience 
and devotion of the man as nothing short of a 
miracle. If ever any man performed miracles, 
he must have been of the type of Durgd Prasdd, 
whose love, devotion and patience are all 
miraculous. If the East and the West are to 
be weighed in the scales, I want some one of 
this type from West to be balanced against our 
Sddhu. If we are to dismiss him as a queer 
man odious to modern taste, and an antiquated 
specimen of humanity, we will certainly do him 
wrong. He followed a principle, it may be 
urged, to folly, but our scriptures and reli- 
gious systems have reserved a place for him. 
His life is an instance of infinite love, infinite 
devotion and infinite patience for a cause, and 
he lived a life of uniform consistency. of prin- 
ciple. The story in one of the Buddhist Jdtakas 
has a living parallel in him and he belongs 
to a region of which the words are the 
Upanishads and the Puranas. For, in the system 
of his creed, one will find elements of culture 



BUDt)HISt ORIGIN ^67 

from the whole Indian wisdom of the Past. 
The exotic air may he too stiff for an outsider ; 
but we, Indians, must analyse the whole sys- 
tem before pronouncing the word of judgment. 
In the case of the Sddhu, it was an extreme 
point that the soul coveted to reach,' but in the 
domain of spirituality the extreme step of the 
ladder often indicates a nearness to the gates 
of the Paradise. 

Similar training in mystic ways is practised 
even now in the country-side, and it is a subject 
well worth being carefully investigated by 
our scholars. 

The Sahajia concept of love itself was derived 
from the Buddhists. We are now in possession of 
definite proof of it from a Pali work called the 
Katha Vathu compiled in the 3rd century B.C. 
We find in Book XXIII of this work that the 
Andhras, the Vetalyaks and the Uttara Pdtbaks 
amongst the Buddhists had special sects which 
advocated a system of religious culture by what 
has been termed Ekahhippaya or "united 
resolve," i.e., by a human pair who feel natural 
sympathy or compassion (not merely passion) 
and who are worshipping, it may be, in some 
Buddha shrine and aspire to be united through- 
out their future lives. The Uttara Pdthaks 
attribute such practices even to their holy men 
and hold that " infra-human beings^ taking the 
shape of Arhants follow sexual desires." 



368 CHAITANYA AN1> HIS AGE 

These people certainly cultured higher sexual 
feelings in private and gave them a religious 
character even as early as the third century 
B.C., if not earlier. But the orthodox commu- 
nity amongst the Buddhists were bitterly hostile 
to the supporters of these views, and the Katha 
Vathu is full of instances of their attacks on 
these sects, who, I believe, have since been 
holding their meetings in secret as their views 
could never bear exposure before the orthodox 
society." 

Love for one with whom one is not bound in 
wedlock is the essential feature 

The Parakiya ao- . ,, . . .. i -u x 

cepted aa a mere <iytn- of thlS Spiritual romaUCO, DUt 

boibychaitanya. ^^^ ly^rieinl influence which 

this creed exerted on the morals of average 
men and women made it abhorrent in the 
eyes of men. Ohandidas of course believed that 
nothing could be so sublime as this form of 
idealised sexual love and he attempted to arrive 
at the spiritual plane by practising it in his life. 
But as I have already stated, he did not recom- 
mend this extremely risky path to ordinary 
spiritual aspirants. Ghaitanya's voice was more 
stern and decisive. He declared himself in a 
clear language against all sexual romance. He 
said that it could not be the path for salvation 
of men. He accepted the Kddhd Krishna legend 
as merely symbolical. He said " Just as the 
ardour of a youth is to meet his beloved, so 



CHAITANYA CONDEMNS IT 369 

should the ardout oi the soul be to meet God ; 
this allegory is adopted for lack of a better one 
to signify the earnest yearnings of the soul." 
True, be visited the shrines, and the figure of 
Krishna was ever present in his mental vision. 
It was a mere sign to bring to his soul the whole 
treasure of devotion. In his delicate vision, ; 
the material and the immaterial seem to have 
lost- all difference, and every sight and sound 
threw him into a frenzied delight. The fence 
of the outer world proved no bar, but on 
the contrary only heightened his spiritual feli- 
cities. Chaitanya said " People speak a good 
deal about love wittiout knowing its true charac- 
ter ; sexual romance is not the higher' love, I 
tell you, on the other hand if one will com- 
pletely get rid of the sexual feeling and find no 
difference between men and women, it is, then 
only that one will- be privileged to taste true 
love." As an instance of his stern attitude 
towards those who wanted to cultivate a little 
the romantic feeling of a sexual nature, I 
remind you of the treatment that junior Haridas 
received from him. It was not merely hard but 
cruel. 

I have already stated that the Sahajia in its 
various forms represents the old culture and 
wisdom of the Buddhists in the shape it had 
assumed during its declijiing days in this country. 
The higher order of monks and nuns fled frpm 
47 



370 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

Bengal proper when the Brahminic Renaissance 
asserted itself in full glory here, and it was 
amongst the masses that the teachings of the 
Mahayana were preserved in a crude form. The 
Buddhist lait^did not receive any enlightenment 
from their leaders, so the occult knowledge 
they preserved is found mixed with great vices 
and superstitions. It is like gold mixed with 
much alloy, which requires the discriminating 
eye of the expert to separate for ascertaining 
their respective worth. 

Surely the Madanotsava or the Puspotsava of 
the old times was in this coun- 

Kamdeva conquered ^j.„ bcforC the aSCOndcnCy Of 
by Krishna. . •" •' 

the Krishna-cult. We find a 
reference to it in the Mudra Rakshasa written in 
the 6th century. This festival used to be held in 
honour of Kamadeva — the Indian Cupid. There 
was an extraordinary enthusiasm amongst the 
masses which chiefly consisted of Non-Aryan 
population, on such occasions. Dance and song, 
flower and the red powder fag, swinging and 
playing — all these created an atmosphere of 
light amusetnents from which all sterner laws of 
sexual ethics were dismissed for the time being, 
and men and women mixed indiscriminately — the 
green trees wearing red apparel, as it were, owing 
to profuse /a^' that filled the whole atmosphere, 
over which the April sun threw its gaudy 
purple rays. Such dance and song, swinging 



kADAJSrOfSAVA Stl 

and other amusements prevail among many of 
the neighbouring hill-tribes even to-day. This 
Madanotsava was replaced by the Dolotsava, when 
the Krishna-cult gained ground, and the latter 
has retained the^light pleasures and gay amuse- 
ments of the former in many respects in a some- 
what abated form — of course the pure moral 
standard of the Vaishnavas has given these 
festivals a far more sober character in respect of 
sexual freedom. Madana's throne is now occupied 
by Madana Mohan (Krishna) and in the 
Vaishnava songs there are frequent references to 
Krishna's power of crushing the pride of hun- 
dreds of Madanas. The victor thus exults over 
his fallen adversary. In order to shew the con- 
trast; clearly the Vaishnavas put a great stress 
upon Kama and Prema. Kamadeva is the God 
of desires and Krishna is the god of love. 
" Krishna is the destroyer of pride of hundreds 
of Kamadevas " is an epigraph to be met with in 
many songs in honour of Krishna. I think it 
is because Krishna had driven the older Deity 
of love from his established throne, and occupied 
it himself that his followers found an occasion 
for repeating every now and then that Kamadeva 
was no match for Krishna. There is, however, 
distinct evidence shewing that Krishna fulfilled 
all the functions that Kamadeva had done in a 
previous chapter of history. It is mentioned in 
the Bala Khanda of the Krishna Kirtan that being 



87a CH AlXANtA AND HIS AGE 

unable to persuade Radha td love him bjr isweiet 
worda and even by threat, Krishna at last took 
recourse to aiming his invincible flower-arrows, 
five in number, at his lady-love. Now nowhere 
in the Vaishnava or other scriptures do we find 
mention of Krishna being equipped with five 
arrows made of flowers. These weapons belong, 
as is universally known, exclusively to Kamadeva, 
who is popularly known as "the God of five 
arrows." As Krishna was placed on the throne 
of Kamadeva in the Dolotsava, it was found 
necessary by his followers to give him all the 
traditional equipments of the rival whose throne 
he had usurped. 

But the Vaishnavas no doubt made the situa- 
tion infinitely more exalted, They idealised love 
and purged it of all dross of sensuality. The 
phaitanya Charitamrita emphasises the point that 
Kama clouds the reason, but Prema is like the 
glorious sun, dispelling all gloom and making 
things appear in their true light. 

The Radha-Krishna cult, I believe, had al- 
ready been introduced amongst the tcmtriks, both 
Hindu and Buddhist, before the Vaishnava re- 
vival in the 15th century. ' Radha-tantra,' 
' B-adha-chakra ' are familiar names in the Tantrik 
literature; the names " Rai-Kanu " so popular in 
the country, savour of a Prakritic derivation, 
earlier than Brahminic Renaissance. Some of 
the European scholars have asserted that thp 



THE DARK SIDE; §73 

< 
Gita-Govinda itself seems to ' be a Sanskri tized 

version of earlier Prakrit lyrics, as the metres 

and poetics used in the book conform more to the 

rules of Prakrit rhetoric than of Sanskrit. 

Eadha-Krishna songs are found in Prakrit: in 

some of the anthologies of that 

The Badha-Krishna _ . n n • i xi j 

cult supplied subjects language. All this shcws that 

for Tantrik practices. m^'i -i ii -r»ni 

Tantriks used the Kadha- 
Krishna cult for their mystic practices, whereas 
the sexual freedom embodied in the legend was 
adopted by the more sensuous people as supply- 
ing a sanction for the gratification of grosser 
pleasures. 

The cult, therefore, had existed in a more or 
less gross form, before the higher standard of 
Vaishnavism gave it a symbolical, interpretation, 
purifying the atmosphere from all sensuality. ; 

In the secret meetings of the Sahajias, the 
degenerate Buddhists, the old 
some of the Sahajia atrocious element of sensua- 
lism is sometimes found to 
linger. These vices have been exposed in the 
most outspoken manner in a novel named 
" Oharu Darshan " written by K^aviraj -Parvati 
Oharan Kavishekhar of Dacca. There is no 
doubt a great deal of exaggeration in his descrip- 
tions. His is a work of satire which always 
magnifies small faults into huge proportions, 
but that there is truth underlying his account, 
no one will deny. I must here repeat that the 



374 CIlAlTANYA AND IltS AG:^ 

charge of wickedness in sexual morals on the 
part of a section of Vaishnavas, brought by 
Babu Jogendrachandra Bhattacharya and Mr. 
Underwood is not true. The dregs of the old mon- 
kish'life, the vices which brought about the over- 
throw of Buddhism in Bengal, is manifest in the 
account given by Parvaticharan. Vaishnavism, 
as I have just said, has been gradually improv- 
ing the morals of the Sahajias — the dilapidated 
Buddhists of the later school in Bengal. Babu 
Parvati Charan himself draws a clear line of 
demarcation between the Vaishnava ideal and 
the contemptible moral standard of the Sahajias 
— the so-called Vaishnavas of Bengal, against 
whom he cries himself hoarse throughout hia 
interesting novel. It is a tale of degraded moral 
virtues, of selfish and disgusting manoeuvres of 
a class of the Sahajia Gurus with vested interests. 
The author saw the grim skeleton of old. tantric 
practices, devoid of its mystic import of a 
conquest of the flesh conceived by its originators, 
now sunk in the utter depths of sensualism. 
The chapter in question of the book "Charudar- 
shan," relates to the visit of a Deputy Magistrate, 
to one of the secret meetings held by a class 
of Sahajias who call themselves " Kishori 
Bhajaks " or " Worshippers of maidens." This 
class even now is the most degraded of all such 
sects. It should be stated here that the members 
of the society^ with a Guru at their head 



What the deputy saw 375 

seldom allow any outsider to enter their circles. 
But as the Guru in the present case was involved 
in a criminal suit pending before the Deputy 
Magistrate, he was eager to please him in every 
possible way, so the rules of privacy were relaxed 
in his favour. The following gives an account 
as to what happened upon the entrance of the 
Deputy Magistrate into the circle. 

"When he came to the circle of the ' Kishori 
Bhajaks,' he found that about 
KUhori Bhajaks" *'" ^00 souls had already gathered 
there. Seventy-five per cent, of 
these people were women, amongst these 83 per 
cent, were widows : the number of the young 
amongst them was no fewer than 50 per cent. 
None of these women had any cbild in their arms. 
Amongst the male members, there was hardly 
any below 16 years of age, the number of old 
men also was very small. Ninety-nine per cent, 
of the visitors were youthful men and youthful 
women. There was no man seen there who had 
any respectable status in society. There was 
scarcely any judge, munsiff, pleader, zeminder, 
talukdar, professor, head pundit or scholarly 
Brahmin in the assembly. The more respectable 
of them were a few mukteers, heads of temples, 
grocers and villagf tax-collectors. Their mean 
dress and coarse manners shewed that they were 
mostly recruits from the scum of society. Though 
the Ddputy Magistrate was not favourably 



376. CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

impressed with all that he saw; one point struck 
him as specially good in the assembly. Even 
th? reformed Brahma Somaj of iwhich he was a 
member, he thought^ could not boast of an equal 
progress in social reformation. Though the 
Brahmas loudly, advocated the cause of female; 
freedom, they could not allow their women to. 
mix with men with the same degree of unreserved? 
familiarity, as he met here. A far greater tolera- 
tion he found in this assembly than he could 
believe possible. Men and women had taken 
their seats incjiscriminatesly. without any scruple 
and with fulL freedom. The Deputy who was an 
einthusiast in the cause of social reformation, was 
so greatly rejoiced at this state of things that 
he forgot, alb the defects that had struck him' 
in the society on his first entrance. As he 
was contemplating this excellent feature he 
observed in their function, the religious service 
commenced. -Krishna Dasi, the woman who 
was implicated in the criminal suit, together 
with a number of other women, came near the 
Deputy and sang the following song : 

" Do not come, brother, to this assembly of 
mad men. 

Come Hot, dear brotherj> sit not too close 

to us. 

If ypu do so, once for all, your caste 
■,;,; : will go. 



THE MERRY MEETING 377 

Here the Ohandal cooks the food which the 

Brahmin takes. 
There was a mad man like us in the Vrinda 

groves. 
He acted as the policeman and made his 

consort {JRadha) the queen. 
Another mad man is our great God Siva. 
He gave all to his Guru, and himself 

delights in ashes and dust. He sleeps 

in the cremation ground. 
We shall name yet another mad fellow. He 

is our Shambhuchand — The Guru of the 

Hindus, the Shiva of the Brahmins and 

the Shai (prophet) of the Musalmans." 

(Shambhuchand who is mentioned in the 
colophon of this song was evidently the 
founder of the sect.) 

When the song was finished, their Guru 
Kamal Das stepped forward and said something 
in a language known only to the people of the 
sect, which implied that unless hunger was 
appeased, their devotional fervour would be lost. 
On the bed that was spread there, large plates, full 
of eatables, were brought and men and women 
sat there and freely ate them. In their joy 
women put food into the mouth of men and the 
latter were not slow in returning the attention, 
and the house rang with merry laughter. The 
Deputy was greatly pleased at seeing this 

4«8 



378 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

unceremonious display of freedom by the ^omen. 
He could not conceive that the people- who called 
themselves Hindus ' and belonged to so many 
different castes, could, without the least prejudice, 
sit together and eat from the same plates placed 
on their beds (highly repugnant tb Hindu tastes 
and; absolutely forbidden by their caste-rules). 
He felt as if the impossiblb had taked place 
when he witnessed the people of high and low 
castes vying with each other in bi-ieaking the 
caste-rulfes, eating remnants of fodd left by one 
andther. Yet what wondier, they lived in the 
Hindu society and passed for its brthodox 
members ! He was encouraged to hope that these 
people could be easily induced to accept the 
tenets of the enlightened Brahma Samaj, as they 
had already made a considerable advance 
towards social reform. When this new hope 
was kindled in his soul, the Magistrate could 
no longer restrain himself, but leaped up from 
his seat and addressed the assembly thus : — 

" Dear sisters and brethern. I am not here 
to encroach in vain on your time. The 
Spectacle of fraternity, freedom and friendly 
union, presented to me here, has given me 
infinite delight and I cannot suppress my desire 
to thank you from the bottom of my heart. 
Especially has your absolute disregard of the 
pernicious caste system filled me with wonder- 
ing admiration. Hence I have risen to speak— 



THE DEPUTY'S SPEECH 3? 9 

to pour out my sympathy with you. I hope you 
Fill excuse me for this iaterauption to tell you 
the truth, I feel almost ashamed at the thought 
that I am causing a delay in the discharge of 
your religious function hy my speech. But I 
assure you, friends, my address will be short. 

Two words more and I have done. Now 
you have disregarded the caster-system and 
shewed such noble exaniple by dining together 
so freely, it would be well for you to keep the 
doors of your house open, so that visitors might 
come and see this noble sight as I am doing. If 
these things are done secretly, there will be no 
opportunity given to the world for preaching the 
truth. Why do you perform this function in 
sfeeret, as if the freedom allowed to women is 
a great sin ? The Bramha Samaj advocates the 
cause of the emancipation of womes by trumpet- 
call and in the open daylight. It is for this reason 
that our cause is gaining ground. When religion 
has given you the strength to discard the old 
conventions, why then, and whom, should you 
fear? Who can resist the force of truth and 
religion ? Just remember that Jesus Christ gave 
his life at the altar of truth, but did not swerve 
from its ways. One of the chief causes of the 
degeneracy of Hinduism is the system of 
Zenana. This barbarous system does not 
exist amongst any civilized nation. If you want 
to improve your community and awaken thpm 



m CttAlTANYA AND HIS AG^ 

to a call of modern cirilisation, and freedom,-^ 
absolute emancipation must be given to women. 
Just see, if half the portion of a tree gets sun- 
light and the other half is in the shade, the tree 
will never be vigorous, its growth will remain 
stunted for ever. In the same way, whatever 
culture and high education you may give to 
your men, unless you give the same advantages 
to your women, the nation will not, and cannot, 
thrive. I believe every word of what I say is 
true. It is for this reason that our poet, with 
a deep insight into the problems of our society, 
announced with a thundering voice : — 

'• Awake — awake O ! Indian women. 
If you awake not — our nation will not awake." 

I am afraid most of you are not adyocates of 
higher education. Still I see from your ways that 
there is much agreement between your views 
and those of the enlightened community — the 
Bramha Samaj. It is for this reason that I 
invite you to attend the meeting of the Bramha 
Samaj, next Sunday. I shall be present there 
to shew you our scheme of social reform. 
If you would feel any scruple or hesitancy in 
coming to our Samaj without a formal invitation, 
or a sign of earnestness on our part, as you are 
quite unknown there, I should gladly bring 
here some conveyances myself at 12 a.m. on that 
day and take you there. If you agree to go to 



*HEY SING IK CtlORtJS 3Si 

our Society's Hall and grace the function with 
your presence, we shall be all verythankfultoyou." 

This speech was not understood by any one 
in the assembly. They did not pay attention 
to it, nor care to listen to such teachings. 
The mouth of their Guru was the only fountain- 
source of instructions recognised by them. They 
did not believe that there could be any other 
mouth from which any advice should proceed. 
They believed with their whole soul that they 
were the only persons who knew the right 
path and the rest of the world had gone wrong. 

They considered scholarship and wisdom to 
serve only to lead to the wrong way. They 
considered the Vedas and other scriptures 
to have been manufactured by worldly men for 
their own selfish ends. They had no regard for 
the Brahmins. They entertained no respect for 
either the priestly class, or for their elders. The 
women cared nothing for their husbands. They 
besides considered image-worship, the sound of the 
sacred bell and conch, the current ideas about 
abstinence and purity to be all vain. They only 
aspired for a state of beatitude, for the culture of 
which their sbcieties had their nocturnal meeting?. 
When the magistrate had finished, the " true men 
and women " of the sect, without heeding to his 
speech any way, or caring to give any reply, 
began to sing in chorus the following song : — 
" Oh my soul, oh my bat, do not % in the twilight. 



382 CHAITANYA AND HIS A^E 

If the black crow can trace you — it will seize you 
and bite. 

Ah my foolish bat, ah my dear bat, remain as a blind 

, thing in the daylight, but become clever in the night. 

Why doest thou, dear bat, hang thy tail upwards? 

Is not that a vile habit, induced by your bad nature ? 

Thou delig^test in drinking the juice . of the Kam- 
ranga fruit. 

Thy tongue is cursed that thou ignorest the ananas 
which grows on the soil. 

Now listen to the truth about the ananas. It puts 
forth eight leaves in eight directions, and in the 
midst is a red something. On the top it is covered 
with bushy leaves and outside it are numbers of 
eye-like holes — inside is its sweet jiiioe. Alas ! 
Chandi could not taste this sweet juice !"' 



' The meaning of this song is known only to the adept. In the 
first portion the poet Chandi (who mentions his name in the 
cplciphpn) refers evidently to the advice so commonly given by the 
people of this sect to remain inactive members of their societies, 
whether Hindn or Mnsalman, absolutely indifierent to the duties 
enjoined by the respective communities. 

The bat sees in the night and hides itpelf in the day-time. The 
Sahajia also does so. His whole activities are roused in the night 
in the secret societies. The reference to the bat's turning its tail 
upwards is condemned ; it probably implies the habit of speculating 
about higher things,— life and death, — which according to the Sahajias is 
quite futile. They attach a great igiportance to the training of the body 
for spiritual purposes by means of which occult powers grow in the soul. 
The tasting of the Kq,mranga fruit which grows on the higher branches 
of its tree is symbolical of higher speculation indulged in by our reli- 
gious aspirants. This is condemned and contrasted with tasting the 
ananas, that grows on the soil, by which the Sahajias mean the body. 
" The eighlj leaves and the red something " mystically refers to 
certain occult powers of the physical body, revealed to one by yoga 
and tantrik praotioes. I am not an adept in these things. 



THE qURU'S SERMON 88^ 

Thp song and the repast were now both 
finished. They began to wash their face. The 
women came forward to help the Deputy to wash 
his. He was not, however, prepared for this 
queer piece of courtesy and struggled to avoifi 
the friendly service offered. The result, however, 
was a bath a little later, for his person as well as 
his clothes were soiled. Kamal Das had 
expected that the song and amusements would 
capture the Deputy's heart. But it was quite the 
opposite. There is difference between men and 
men. What pleased the illiterate, proved 
repugnant to the taste of an educated man. The 
Deputy became quite disgusted with the 
shamelessness of women. So after bathing he 
did ilot JalloW the women the privilege which 
they had there, of wiping the person of a 
respectable tnan. The Gurh Eamal Das at this 
stage came forward to give a religious character 
to the amusements enjoyed there. He said : — 

" Oontemptj shame, anger, fear, greed, envy 
and addiction to worldly things and a habit of 
blaming — thiase are the eight bonds. By regular 
training of the mind, these bonds should be cut. 
Unless one is free from these, one cannot attain 
childlike simplicity. Unless one is simple as 
a child, one cannot approach God." 

The Magistrate could find no agreement 
between what Kamal Das said and the shamei- 
lessness of the women there. But Kamal Das, 



884 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

stopping for a* while, resumed his speech in the 
following way : — 

" There are four regions in the spiritual 
plane. (1) The " Sthula " or that of the super- 
ficial and coarse, (2) the " Pravartaka " — that 
of the beginner, (3) of the Sadhaka — the more 
advanced in spiritual training, (4) Siddha — of the 
emancipated. 

There are six things in respect of each of 
these : — 



(1) Desha — country, (2) Kdla (time), 
(3) Ashray (help), (4) Pdtra (subject), (5) Aba- 
lambana (ways and means), (6) Uddipana 
(impetus). 

A. In respect of the region of "Sthula" — the 
coarse and the superficial : — 

1. Desha (country)... The world. (Jambu 

Dwipa). 

2. Kdla (Time) . . . The fleeting as opposed 

to eternal. 

3. Ashray (help) ... The feet of parents and 

elders. 

4. Pdtra (subject) ... Brahma — The Creator. 

5. Abalambana (ways 

and means) ... The Vedic rites. 

6. Uddipana (impetus) Hearing of the recita- 

tion of scriptures. 



THE SERMON 



385 



B 



In respect of the region of " Pravartaka "—(the 

beginner) : 
1. Desha ... Nadia — the birth-place of 

Chaitanya. 
(The beginner must consider himself as a citizen 
of the shrine, having no connection with the rest 
of the world.) 

Eternity, — the Kali-yuga. 
The feet of the Guru. 
Chaitanya. 

Company of saintly man. 
Recitation of the name 
of Krishna. 

C 

In respect of the region of the Sadhaka : 



2. 


Kdla 


3. 


Ashray 


4*. 


Patra 


5. 


Abalambana . . 


6. 


Uddipana 



1. 


Desha 


. The Vrinda groves (the 
shrine of Krishna). 


2. 


Kala 


. Eternity. The Dwapara- 

yuga. 


3. 


Ashray 


.. The Gopis of the Vrmda- 
groves (to culture 
tender emotions on 
their footsteps). 


4. 


Patra 


. Krishna. 


5. 


Abalambana ... The love of the Gopis. 


6. 


Uddipana 


. The sound of flute 
(reminding one of 
Krishna's flute). 



49 



386 CHAITANYA and HIS AGS 

D 
The region of the Siddhas : 



1, Desha 


The Vrinda groves (not 




the physical plane as 




in the preceding stage) 




but the eternal shrine 




of the soul, called the 




Nitya Vrindavana or the 




everlasting Vrindavana). 


2. Kdla 


18 dandas of the great 




night. 


3. Ashray 


Rupamanjari — one of the 




chief maids of Radha. 


4. Pdtra 


Radha 


5. Abalambana ... 


The emotion of the milk- 




maids of the Vrinda 




groves. 


Uddipana 


Loving services. "^ 



' The stages are evidently taken largely from the Vaisnava doctrines. 
The Boul rises step by step from the materialistic plane. At the first 
stage he is under the guidance of his parents, attends to the fleeting 
things around and has a simple belief in his Maker with whom his 
acquaintance is of a mere superficial kind. In the next plane, he owns 
citizenship of Nadia, the Vaisnava shrine, cuts himself from the rest 
of the world, the laws of which do not govern him. He tries to culture 
his higher emotions there with the help of his Guru. In the third stage 
he has dispensed with his Guru and even with Chaitanya and proceeded 
to realise the emotional love of the Oopis for Krishna. The fourth 
plane is entirely mystic, where the soul is the dweller of the eternal 
region of bliss. The references to this stage are not very clear, 
involved as they are in esoteric practices known only to the adept. 



THE WICKEDNESS OP THE GURUS 387 

Then the women sang another song, mystic 
and unintelligible, though couched in the current 
language, full of simplicity, directness and force. 
I need not give the song here but shall resume 
the topics of the book. 

The spiritual truths embodied in the song 
or its moaning were not at all clear to the 
Deputy, so he could not join the men and 
women in their appreciation of it. All of them 
covertly smiled in derision and the magistrate 
felt the insult. 

The author next proceeds to denounce the im- 
moralities indulged in by the men and women 
of the circle, some of whom had a fancy to 
play the sports played by Krishna and the milk- 
women. The scene created thereby appeared 
revolting to our magistrate who contrived with 
much difl&culty, to escape from the assembly. 
It need hardly be said that the good opinion 
which he had formed at first, was now com- 
pletely removed and he left the circle with a 
feeling of disgust. 

The serious Vaisnavas of the Chaitanya 
Order have naught but unmitigated abhorrence 
for the Sahajias of all classes, though the latter 

These fonr stages hare things more or less in common with those 
of the Vaisnavas bat the common element is the result of an adaptation 
bj the Sahajia Qurus of their own creed to that of the Vaisnavas, the 
Modus operandi of the former is quite different, savonring of the 
practices of the Buddhist tantriks of the latter da^. 



388 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

call themselves Vaisnavas of the same order. 
The author of " Charu Darshan " * as I have 
already noticed, while sneering at the faults of 
the Sahajias, gives a sunny and smiling sketch 
of the Vaisnavas of his ovra order. No one will, 
however, douht that his account is one-sided. 
There are certainly good Sahajia Gurus, also good 
disciples, famous for the mystic powers they have 
developed, as well as for their ascetic life, full of 
nohle abstinence and philanthrophy. As, how- 
ever, the Sahajia- cult is professed mostly by the 
illiterate and the rustics, there may he quite 
naturally some crude and vulgar elements in 
it. Even in the above extracts, the Buddhistic 
views are in evidence in open revolt against 
the Brahmins, the Vedas and the Hindu 
society. There is, besides, the monkish disregard 
for the family ties, which would remind one of 
similar sentiments expressed in the Jnanadi 
Sadhana. The reader will find how a man may 

' " Gharu DarBban " is a Bengali romance by Babn Farvati Charan 
Kabishekhar published at the Moslem Hataishi Press, Dacca. Its 
price is Be. 1-8 as., and it is to be had of the anther, Asak Lane, 
Dacca. It is a remarkable book, its humours hag more flashes than 
one finds in the ' Hutnm Pechar Naksa ' or ' Alaler Gharer Dulal ' — it 
gives the most faithful picture of Bengali life and of the religions 
views of those unfamiliar with Western ideas. Written by one, who 
knows the character of his own people far better than most men, he 
has the gift of style which is not acquired but is natural, and his 
shrewd insight into human character invests his writings with a life- 
like and realistic vividness. If one wants to know Bengal as it is, let 
him read this book — it it not clouded by European ideals. The book 
ought to be translated into English. 



THE SONGS 389 

worship a woman— as a coarse of his spiritual 
training. Though such a thing may appear 
queer to us, yet the instance of Durga Prasad 
clearly shews that it is quite possible for a 
man- to accept the doctrine and follow it. 

Though most of the songs of the Sahajias 
„ , .. „ eLrewvitteniii the Sandhyabhdsd 

Sahajia Songs. "^ 

which none but the adept can 
penitrate yet there are some which are in- 
telligible to us. They touch the heart by their 
naive and simple charm. The songs of Lai 
Sashij from which I have given copious extracts 
in my Typical Selections (Vol. II.) are mostly 
difficult of comprehension. I will quote here 
a few of the songs written by other authors, to 
shew the lucid charm of these spontaneous songs, 
which burst forth from the heart, like the 
Kundi and the Malati flowers from our soil. 

1. "A great storm is breaking in ; the eyes 
see water everywhere — lands are submerged. 

! boatman, ply thy oar steadily. Whoever has 
a boat, must face the storm, don't you know this 
boatman ? Wait a while, O boatman and 
listen ! Spread the sail of truth and ply the 
boat slowly over the rough waters. Look at 
and see the One Who is at the helm. Why dost 
thou look at the storm ?"^ 

1 ^5p1^ ^^\f^ ^ra, Bftsr 5f«i ^rtt^ f^, i^ ?t»T k^ ^^ra i 



390 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

2. My Guru is a mad fellow, thrice-blessed 
is he, oh ! what excellent qualities has he ! He 
is without qualities they say ;^ it is false, there is 
a perfection and harmony in them, that I find 
in Him, He throws away sandal perfumes and 
covers himself with ashes. Talk not of his 
possessions. A mere rag and torn mantle, are 
all he has. He teaches truths to the poor and 
lowly — nay, it is an empire that he gives 
them. He casts his quick glance around and 
there is no place where he does not go. He is 
here now and everywhere, and where is it that 
he is not ?" ^ 

A curious couplet of the Ramballavi sect 
of the Sahajias, embodying their tenets runs 
thus : — 

" Kali and Krishna, God and Khoda — a mere 
fight with names. When combatants fight, 
these names throw them into a puzzle. Do not 
be a party to these disputes. Oh 1 my soul 1 
sing Kali, Krishna, God and Khoda — the names 
of the One. " * 

> The Brahman is without qualities according to Sankara's spiritual 
philosophy. 

' "131 'SIRJI ttt^I C^Ttt, "^^ tfil 'tf? Wti) 51^ ^l^rtt I 
qtfe f'Ff '®1 C5I»t, Jf^ 'StTa C»W, 6*^ 5tffe 'Srtr^P^ '5CT tft'SR 5l^ I 

f^ ■^ «(CT5 ^11, cn^ 'srtii c?'i5l ^"tll, cftsift^ iicBR 5ft«l. ^m ^Mt\ 
E*5i csrtst^ 5ts, c^ iptc^ 'sif^atts, c^M «rtr^ c^«il Trt. 

c^tl-srltw— it^f 

?1^^k5rh3ii 'R ■^t^ f ^ 'Its ctW ^wtqii 



THE MYSTIC IMPORT 891 

I do not quote too many of these couplets 
because I cannot understand them but from their 
exceedingly simple language, and homely re- 
ferences to the familiar things of village-life, they 
seem to have a great influence upon those who 
understand the technicalities of the Sahajia 
theology ; the songs are all about boats trades, 
mortgages, farming and a hundred other topics 
of rustic interest, evidently used with such 
appropriate and direct reference to religious 
experience, and strung in such rhythmical 
harmony that they have the power to charm 
and please, though most of the higher truths 
conveyed are unfamiliar to us. 

Though the majority of the recruits are from 
the lower ranks of society, there is a respec- 
table minority of higher class people amongst 
them, having talent and education of no mean 
order. Their number is immense. At Ghosh- 
para and other centres, many thousands of people, 
mostly women, gather during the religious festi- 
vities of the sect in April. 

Even outside Bengal there are these Sa.hajia 
„ ^ju- ^ A i. ^%. sects under various names. In 

Baddhist adopt other 

creeds in Orissa. ^jj^g towu of Dhcukanal in Orissa 

there is a temple of Mahaprabhu, where special 
religious festivals are held thrice every year, in 
February, April and November. Many thousands 
of people attend these festivals. The Guru is an 
" up-country" man. He ha's a large number of 



392 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

Bengali disciples besides a considerable number 
of the Madrasis, known as the ' Telengas ' or 
Telegu-speakihg people. There is amongst 
these a sprinkling of the Kurmis of the North- 
western Provinces. The temple lies at a place 
24 miles distant from Jonepur — a station on the 
B. N. Railway. The Mahaprabhu worshipped 
in the temple is not Chaitanya, but the Sungod. 
The name of the Guru is Mani Das Babaji. 
Though of an " up-country " extraction he is a 
domiciled resident of Jaj pur. The people of the 
sect are prohibited to eat in a house where the 
srad ceremony is going on. Besides they would 
by no means eat in the house of a Brahmin or 
the food cooked by him. The more advanced 
members of this sect are said to be endowed 
with marvellous powers of healing. 

Though this is not a quite relevant topic, as 
these people do not belong to the Chaitanya cult, 
I have introduced it here to show that in various 
parts of India, the Buddhists, after the Brahminic 
Renaissance, took shelter under different forms 
of prevailing Hindu religion, retaining much of 
their original creed of Mahayanism. As the 
Vaisnava sects opened their doors of brotherhood 
to all, irrespective of creed and colour most of 
these Buddhists incorporated themselves with 
that community, and what could be a greater 
proof of their having once been Buddhists than 
the fact that some, of these sects refuse to take 



THE BAUL AND THE VAISNAVA 393 

food cooked by a Brahmin up to this day, though 
they call themselves Hindus? The Brahmin 
was the great enemy of the Buddhist who was 
eventually crushed by him. The Sunya Puran 
of the Bengali Buddhists cries itself hoarse in 
its last chapter against the Brahmins and 
announces that it was for vengeance of the 
wrongs done by the Brahmins to the Buddhists, 
that the Mahomedans were commissioned 
by the Most High to destroy the Brahminic 
temples. The Bathuris and some other tribes 
of Orissa, who outwardly profess Vaisnavism 
were at one time Buddhists.- They have preserv- 
ed much of the older creed in their theology 
and scriptures under the disguise of Vaisnava 
religion. Rai Sahib Nagendra Nath Vasu has 
proved this fact beyond all shadow of doubt in 
his book called " Buddhism in Orissa." 

The Sahajias have composed many songs on 
Badha- Krishna. Unfortunate- 

The Kadha-Ktisna 

Bongs of the Bauis as \j thcse havc uot yet been 

contrasted with those i t i i mi 

of the Vaisnavas. coUectcd Or published, Thesc 

songs deal with the loving sports of the Divine 
cowherd and his consort the princess, — the 
adventurous boat-trip of the lover — called the 
Noyka Khanda, — the man or Radha's jealousy and 
her outward indifference to Krishna's entreaties, 
however much she was gratified by them, — the 
abhisar or the secret meetings— the mathur 
or separation and many other still nicer 
50 



394 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

classifications of tender emotions. The Sahajia 
Vaisnavas, the Bauls and others, also deal with 
these topics as the genuine Vaisnavas do. 
But one can clearly see a difference between 
the modes of treatment of the two different 
schools. The Baul takes a very ordinary view 
of matters in his songs and cannot for a 
moment forget that Krishna is the Lord of the 
Universe and Radha is a devoted worshipper. 
This brings in the phraseology of Divine Service 
and prayers in his attempts to describe 
sports. For instance when the ferry-boat of 
which Krishna is at the helm is tossed by the 
waves of the Jumna under a storm, Radha, in 
the Baul-songs of Noyka Khanda, offers a regular 
prayer like a devotee fallen in distress. The 
human interest flags as the spiritual element 
gets the upper hand. Every now and then the 
Baul in his songs introduces Dehatatta, or the 
physical principles for development of our occult 
powers — the goal of the Buddhist tantriks, 
Vaisnavism is a creed of joy and Buddhism of 
misery. In the Baul-songs reference to decay, 
death, and transitoriness of life and body is 
frequent. But the true Vaisnavism makes an 
essential departure from viewing such an aspect 
of life ; it is all sunny and even in its pain, it 
seizes the golden moments of love, and delights 
in dying the death of a love-martyr. In the pure 
Vaisnava-songs the theological ideas do not 



THE BAUL AND THE VAISNAVA 395 

find a place. The love songs are pure love-songs 
and if they bean a high spiritual significance, 
it is only because this love appears in such an 
idealised and platonic form, that, though it is born 
in human heart, it points to the divine element 
in human feelings. The intensely human — 
the selfless absorption of one's self in love — is 
intensely .spiritual as well. The Baul and the 
pure Vaisnava thus offer a contrast, one model- 
ling the new creed according to age-long con- 
ventions of a different character, the other offer- 
ing all the freshness of a new ideal in poetry 
and spiritual domain which essentially emanated 
from Chaitanya. Sir Rabindranath Tagore is 
more indebted to the Baul than to the Vaisnava, 
so far as the spirit of his songs is concerned, 
though he has frequently borrowed the sweet 
language of the Vaisnava masters. The Bauls 
have appealed to him, as in their faith there 
is no place reserved for image-worship and 
there is more of philosophy in their creed than 
ardour of devotion. The Bauls aim at that ' quiet ' 
of the souls which is purely Buddhistic. But 
Rabindranath has not accepted their pessimistic 
outlook of life nor their speculation of physical 
training — the Dehatatta. 

I invite the students of the vernacular songs 
to apply themselves to finding out the difference, 
and analyse from the standpoints of the different 
creeds of the Baul and the Vaisnava, the lyrical 



396 CHAITATSTYA AND HIS AGE 

literatures of both the cults which professing 
the same religion, yet differ so largely in some 
of their essential features. 

Babu Parvaticharan has given the sketch 
of a Sahajia Guru. Under the shade of the 
Radha-Krishna legend, he is depicted as prac- 
tising all kinds of sexual immoralities. But the 
genuine Vaisnava, however wicked he may be, 
will never forget the sacredness of the Radha- 
Krishna legend and defile it. Even the bad 
women of the city purify themselves by touch- 
ing the Ganges water and changing their clothes, 
when they have to appear in the ashar of the 
Kirtan songs. They enter the house for this 
purpose in the frame of mind in which one 
enters the church. When a song is finished 
and the name of the poet is to be mentioned 
in the colophon, they join their hands and bow, 
and offer their respect to the songs, as if they are 
sacred as mantras. What greater refutation 
can there be of the charge of sensuousness 
in the Radha-Krishna songs ? The audience in- 
variably return as better people, with a spiritual 
awakening in the soul. These songs have been 
thoroughly idealized in the country by the 
faith, austerities and renunciation of the Vais- 
nava saints, whose interpretation has filtered 
down to the lowest layer of our social life. But 
not so always with the pseudo-Vaisnavas — the 
Sahajias. Their point of strength is tantrikism, 



SAHAJIA A FORM OF BUDDHISM 397 

yoga, and a hundred ways to attain a mystic 
stage of jnan, in which control of self, not 
the beatitude reached by emotions, is the aim. 
They adopted the Vaisnava creed merely for 
expediency's sake in order to hare some status in 
the country which had rejected them altogether. 
Hence the Radha-Krishna cult was in some 
cases vitiated by the more wicked of the Sahajia 
Gurus. 



CHAPTER III. 

I cannot conclude this book without point- 
ing out the duties of our young graduates who 
have taken up the Indian vernaculars as their 
subjects of study. My appeal is to all educated 
men of my country, specially to these students, 
as they are the more immediately interested. 
Buddhism has not passed away from this coun- 
try ; it lives not amongst a few but amongst 
thousands to-day. Is it not curious that we 
should always await messages from Europe 
to satisfy Our intellectual curiosity even in 
matters that are Indian, nay purely Bengali? 
Shall we sit quiet like Buddhist gods in stone 
and put forth our energies only to copy, when 
a Max Muller, a Rhys Davids, a Sylvain Levi 
or an Oldenburg has brought us new facts? 
We boast of our intellectuality but completely 
ignore the large field that is before and around 
us in our immediate neighbourhood, which 
we can approach for research and interpret as no 
foreigner can do. It is true that for the purposes 
of excavations and other expensive measures 
required for research, European officers who 
can easily command help from the Government 



THE DUTY OF THE RESEARCH STUDENTS 399 

and from their own communities, ha^e a distinct 
advantage over us. Yet if we learn the lesson 
of organised action, pecuniary resources may 
he open to us in a hundred ways. We must 
not forget that the race that has made the 
Germans, the Japanese, the English and even 
our neighhours, the Marwarees, rich, remains 
poor to-day through not knowing the principles 
of organised labour. 

But in respect of a research into the ways 
and manners of the various sects living in Bengal 
no money is required. "We should only mix 
with our own men, not despising our rustic neigh- 
bours. The proud Europeans mix with them 
when they want jute and other products of our 
land — but we do not care to do so, even for the 
sake of the truths of our own religion, philosophy 
and literature which they have preserved and 
we have lost. Vaisnavism is making itself accept- 
ed more intimately in the ranks of these pseudo- 
Vaisnavas and, I am afraid, after some years 
the Buddhist wisdom amongst them will dwindle 
away. It is, therefore, time that we should make 
researches in these fields, which are so near to us. 
Europeans want to be intimately acquainted with 
the truths of Indian wisdom from educated 
Indians. What they acquire from our old scrip- 
tures and literature is good enough, but about the 
phases of genuine Indian religious culture and 
rural literature, at present the educated Indians 



400 CHAITANYA AND HIS AGE 

will mislead and disappoint them. They will only 
re-echo the sentiments, of Europeans in a feebler 
voice, but this they do not expect from Indians. 
We do not know our own country. In the pride 
of western culture we have so long kept aloof 
from the more genuine sources from which we 
could learn much. Within the last half a century 
education on Western lines has made rapid 
strides to the utter destruction of our own ideals 
of culture. If any European scholar seeks the 
old Indian wisdom, born anew amongst our multi- 
tude, let him go to the villages even as some of his 
European countrymen go seeking jute and other 
agricultural products. There are even to-day 
many Gurus who preach the old cults. They are 
not guided by the spirit of Hindu renaissance 
but proceed in the catholic manner of the ancient 
teachers laying no stress on caste or convention. 
And though some of them may interpret the 
scriptures wickedly, as already shown by us in this 
chapter, surely there are others whose teachings 
represent the flowering faith of the Mahayana 
Buddhists. They have a very vast literature, 
only a portion of which has been published by 
the Presses of Bat-tala, but by far the greatest 
portion of which is lying in the shape of manus- 
cripts, uncared for and not at all noticed by the 
educated community. In these religions, there is 
a constant tendency to rebuild the social fabric 
on the basis of amity and brotherhood and unify 



SAHAJIA AN ALL-EMBRACING CREED 401 

the divergent elements into one homogeneous 
whole. There are Mahomedans and Christians 
and in some parts of the country, there is 
also a sprinkling of population professing other 
creeds, such as the Sikhs. It is therefore very 
interesting to observe that many of the Sahajia 
creeds have included not only the Bible and the 
Koran in the list of their holy books, but have 
also, as the Ramvallabhis have done, reserved a 
place for the Grantha Saheb of Guru Nanak. 
Though attending thus to the scriptures of all 
religions prevailing in this land in a truly 
cosmopolitan spirit, they have yielded their own 
views to none, but have subordinated aU oif them 
to their own special creeds which contain the old 
wisdom of the Tantrik Buddhists. They have 
not been able to declare war against the Maulavi, 
the Missionary and the Hindu Guru, but in an 
unassuming way . they have contrived to have 
large foUowings from all these great religious 
sections of the population of Bengal, making 
them their own in the fullest sense. Eor, the 
Christian Sahajia, the Mahomedan Sahajia 
and the Hindu Sahajia pay by far a greater 
respect to their Sahajia Gurus than the con- 
ventional leaders of their own respective societies. 
The Sahajia will give up his life and property 
at the bidding of his Guru, though outwardly 
he seems to cling to his community. The song 
quoted on page 380 says that the Sahajia remains 

61 



402 CHAITANVA AND HIS AGE 

like one blind in the daylight, his eyes are open- 
ed in the night and his true life begins in the 
night. In the day-time he has to do conventional 
things, to observe the rules of caste and pay 
respect to the Mollah, the Missionary or the 
Brahmin as the case may be and abide by their 
orders, but he becomes the true man at night 
in the secret societies, when his real work begins, 
and so great is the attraction of these societies 
which sit every night, that men and women 
of the Sahajia cult consider it their greatest 
naisfortune if they cannot attend them. There 
they perform their mystic rites, promulgate the 
doctrines of their creeds, indulge in songs for 
the culture of emotion, and pay no heed to the 
rules of caste and other social restrictions. 
There is much that is very good mixed with 
the vulgar and bad, as I have already stated, 
but in many such societies only good things 
are done where the Guru is really a good, and 
pious man. 

The catholicity of soul and the brotherhood 
of men that are cultivated in these circles to- 
gether with a high spiritual training, have only 
been possible in Bengal because all these 
different classes of men can gather together 
under the banner of Chaitanya. It was he who 
preached an all-embracing brotherhood and 
showed that the portals of heaven with all its 
treasures of beatitude might be open to men 



SAHAJIA UNDER CHAITANYAISM 403 

by culture of tender emotions and by discarding 
scriptural rites, and hence it is that the 
Sahajias have flourished under the protection of 
his name up to now. The creeds require 
thorough investigation, and their mystic writ- 
ings in the Sandhya Bhasa should be made clear 
by research. 



INDEX 



Abalarabaua...384, 385, 386. 

Abbiratn Lilaiurila...98. 

Abhiram Goawami...?. 

Abhiram Swami...360. 

Abhisar...316, 393. ' 

Achar...352. 

Aohyuta...38, 

Aohyatoharan Choudhury...361. 

Adhaksaja...38. 

Adhira...298. 

Addikhanda...73. 

Adiparva...l08. 

Adaitya...l07 

Aditi...l0'7. 

Adwaitabad...322. 

Adwaitaoharva...l6, 46, 47,49, 61, 64, 
101, 102, 106, 107, 109, 1 10, 133, 144, 
151, 157, 163, 167,173, 175, 187, 239, 
244, 245, 284, 291 

Adwaita Prakasa...66, 98, 118. 

Aghasura...34, 36. 

Aghore Panthis...l7l, 275. 

Agradwip . . .802. 

Aiswarya...41, 42. 

Ajitnath Nayaratna...l08. 

Akshoykatnar Datta...344 

Alalnath...2U, 212, 248. 

Alandi...63. 

Allah. ..153. 

Allahabad... 227, 228, 230, 241, 
242 

Amarda...l77. 



American tourist... 236. 

Amina Khatoon...62. 

Amjhora...277. 

Aiulaki...l24. 

Ainogha...66. 

Amritabatika. . . 187. 

Amritabazar Fatrik.a ..60, 88. 

Anaiita,..76. 

Ananta Shayya...76 

Aniraddha...38. 

Annakut...227. 

Anta Kbaada..,314. 

Anaragballi...92, 98. 

Arati...288. 

Arctic regions... 360. 

Arhants...S61. 

Arjuna...203. 

Aryan... 14. 

Ashar...262, 263, 396. 

Ashta Sastreo Bikar...308. 

Aahray...384, 385, 386. 

Asiatic Society Journal... 267. 

Assam... 125, 242. 

Assamese. ..242. 

Assulatvrin . . . 23, 

Astavingsati Tatva.. 100. 

Almanepadi. . , 1 18. 

Atmanibedan . . . 309. 

Atulchand...344. 

Aul...342. 

Avanga8...211 

Ayodha...220. 



Ballava Bhatta...239, 241,242. 
Ballare...23!}, 240, 241, 248, 256. 
Baiba Aul...342, 344. 
Badisingha...l21, 293. 
Bataranri...l77. 
Baisakh ..191, 211. 
Bailpara...306, 307. 
Baniantree...63. 



Bandhu...62. 
Banipati...236, 237. 
Baikantha...203. 
Baraha...88. 
Basudev Ghosh ... 192. 
Basu Ghosh. ..97, 159, 291. 
Basudeva Sarbabhaum...lOO, 190,179, 
180, 185,213,239,244. 



INDEX 



405 



Basudeva Datta...l87, 233. 

Batsayana Gotra.. 101. 

Ballal Sagar...ll2. 

Ballavi Sept.. 1.22. 

Banamali Aoharyya...l22, 123. 

Banamali...l23. 

Banana plant. ..270. 

Ba8uli...24, 25, 26, 30, 355. 

Batsalya...27. 170. 

Balaram...33, 64, 88, 348, 349. 

Balaram Das... 152, 282, 283. 

Bharati Derg,...169. 

Bhilpantha...201. 

Bhik8hus...l0, 335, 336. 

Bhikshanies.. 10, 335, 336. 

Bhadra...202. 

Bhargadev...l2, 193. 

BhagaTata...31, 32, 35, 36, 51, 69, 76, 

77, 111, 118, 136, 182, 232, 240, 241, 

252, 254, 256, 289, 323, 331. 
Bhagayat Aoharya...233, 252. 
Bhaktiratnakara...42, 92, 98, 155.. 
.Bhaga...348. 
Bha kti.Cnlt...l, 42, 44, 46, 47, 180, 

22^, 230, 232, 244, 288, 290, 291, 294, 

296, 310. 
BHugarva...49. 
Bhakta ..47. 66, 91, 138. 
Bhagan Aoharya...238. 
BhubaneBwar. . . 178. 
BhaUi...51, 73, 135, 147, 231, 244, 

324, 

Bharati Gossami ... 1 2. 
Bhaktirasamrita Sindhu...78, 183; 
Bhabasanmilan ... 313. 
Bhababhuti...310. 
Bhowanisaukar. . . 177. 
Bhakta Mai... 204. 
Bipralabdha...312. 
Bijoynagar... 184. 
Bijoy Gapta...54. 
Bibhjsaiia...83. 
Bishnudev...ll6. 
Bijli Khan... 228, 229. 
Biradhamati. . . 121 . 
Bisarad...l79. 
Birbhuin...l6. 
Bikrampore ... 39. 
Bisranti Ghat... 227. 
Bidyapati...252. 
Birabhadra...284, 336. 
Bniamanjal...252. 
Bible... 346, 401. 
Balya Lila Sutra... 98. 
BakaBur...34. 
Baka...36. 
Baroda...200. 



Barmukhi,..43, 205, 206, 207, 208. 

Bankol...45, 201, 202. 

Barai...341. 

Bau]...340, 345,394,395. 

Barati..,343. 

Balaji...206. 

Baladev Bhattacharya...224, 228. 

Baladeva...224, 225. 

Bateswar...l94. 

Balii Khmda...371. 

Baroda...200. 

Bakreshwar . . . 239, 

Bashndev...l59, 180, 181, 182, . 183, 

185, 239, 246. 
BalagQpal...242. 
Bamnath...246, 247, 
Sattala Press .259, 400. 
Bangabasi Press ... ^ 59. 
Bay of Bengal. ..261. 
Baid Pashara Buddhism... 256, 267, 

285. 
Batsalyarasa ... 272. 
Balasore...l77. 
Basanta Banjan Bay... 17. 
Baranagar...233. 
Benapole...56. 
Betasak...l24. 
Betal...]25, 
Bel. ..167. 
Bengal. ..1-3, 21-23, 32, 37-39, 41-45, 

51, 52, 56, 95, 100, 142, 172, 219, 220, 

223, 233, 237, 244, 245, 267, 276, 278, 

279, 280, 284, 285, 286, 287, 291, 325, 

326, 334, 338, 348, 351, 360, 391, 399, 

401 402. 
Beve'ridge...267, 275, 276. 
Begum. ..19, 21. 
Bengali. ..2, 19, 32, 33, 35, 37, 42, 43, 

54, 64, 71, 97, 103, 143, 204, 222, 237, 

259, 338, 339, 392, 393, 398. 
Benares... 57, 120, 225, 22fi, 230-232, 

201. 
B. N; Railwajs...392. 
Beshar...71. 
Bishanath...233. 
Bidagdha Madhaba . . . 238. 
Bi8hwarup...l04, 106, 110, 141, 161, 
175. 
Biahnnpriya...24, 103, 128, 166 174, 

204. 
Bireswar Sen... 177. 
Bombay Presidency. ..294, 
Borooh...301. 
Balahevic...331. 
Boal:...342. 
Bagula...l97, 201. 
Brahi^a Eshatriyag...l25 



406 



INDEX 



Brahmin. ..11, 17, 26, 27, 31, 47, 48, 
53, 54, 55, 57, 64, 71,75,105,111, 
112, 123, 124, 126, 129, 140, 147, 15 , 
162, 199, 210, 214, 218, 222, 226, 228, 
235, 249, 250, 254, 256, 279, 281, 282, 
286, 300, 302, 325, 339, 340, 344, 349, 
353, 377, 381, 388, 392, 393, 402. 

Brindabandas...ll, 55, 65, 73, 74, 77, 
78, 81, 82, 94, 95, 97, 99, 110, 113, 1 18, 
120, 141, 170, 179, 246, 311. 

Brahinmio...26, 28, 48. 

Brabmanic Renaissance ..84^352, 370, 
372. 

Brahmandabhandodasa,..66, 73. 

Brindaban...74, 77, 90, 94, 122, 178, 
189, 221-224, 227, 228, 234, 254, 262, 
318. 

Brindagroves...77, 80, 131, 163, 223, 
224, 299, 301, 315. 

Biabman £rishna Das... 87. 

Brihaspati...ll8. 



Brahma. ..384 

Brahmas...37 . 

Brahma Sntra...323. 

Brahma Samaj...376, 378, 379. 

Bnran...49. 

Biirdwan...l45, 176. 

Budha...61, 62, 222, 276, 324-327. 

Buddhist.. .8, 10, 13, 184, 193, 284, 

334, 335, 337, 338, 354, 367, 368, 369, 

370, 372, 373, 374, 392, 393. 
Buddhimanta Khan... 128, 157, 187. 
Buddhism. ..2, 11, 13, 14, 256, 267, 

285, 317, 335, 336, 353, 374, 394, 

398. 
Buddha Gan-o-Doha...lO 
Buddha Doha-o-Gan...4. 
B nddhist Sangha . . . 268. 
Buddhist Bhikkas...317. 
Buddhist Bbik:khams...313. 
Buddhist tantrics 
BudhuTi...319. 



Canarese...295. 

Calcutta.. .262, 312, 336, 344. 

OarfestivitieB...96, 246, 263. 

Chaitanya...2, 12, 16, 23, 24, 29, 31, 
32, 36, 40-43-47, 52, S3, 56, 58-64, 
67-72, 74-80, 82-85, 87-97,99-102, 105- 
109, 115, 129, 135, 139, 141, 145, 146, 
151, 169, 170, 172-174, 177-183, 185- 
200, 202-205j 207, 209, 210, 211-216, 
217-246, 248, 249-255, 252-268, 274, 
276-280, 282, 284-287, 289, 290, 292- 
295, 302, 303, 305, 308, 310, 312, 314- 
320, 322-327, 331, 336, 344, 345, 348, 
368, 369, 385, 387, 392, 395, 402. 

haitanya Bhagavata ... 1 1 , 36, 37, 40, 
42, 43, 50, 72, 73, 77, 87, 90, 95, 97, 
101, 107, 108, 115, 116, 119, 124, 137, 
144, 151, 156, 158, 159. 

Chakra...6, 87, 194. 

Chandal...6, l7l, 275, 377. 

Chandidas...9, 10, 14, 16-22, 26-30, 32, 
35, 36, 40, 69, 126, 143, 145, 146, 252, 
266, 354, 357-360, 368. 

Chandipore...l2, 193. 

Chaitanya Chandradoya Natak . 12, 
84, 97, 159. 

Chaitanya Mangal...23, 55, 57, 77, 81, 
88, 89, 95, 97, 115, 259, 262, 263. 

Christ.. .28, 70, 141, 268, 269, 332, 350. 

Chaitanya Charitamrita...38, 45, 63, 66, 
77, 79, 86, 87, 90, 94, 95, 97, 101, 178- 
180, 183-185, 213. 217, 219, 221, 230, 231, 
247, 251, 289, 290, 292, 314, 324, 372. 



Charitamrita... 44, 225, 231, 233, 241, 

242, 243, 246, 252, 257, 259, 261, 275, 

277, 279, 294, 328, 329, 337 
Charak... 306. 
Chaitanya and His 
Companions... 49, 68, 101, 126,186, 

209, 216, 238, 243, 327. 
Chaitanya Deva... 58, 246, 290, 292. 
Chaitanya Charitam... 60, 61, 67, 84, 

94, 126, 159,. 
Chaitanya cult... 69, 337,. 
Chitralata... 127,, 
Champaka... 80,. 
Chaitanya Chandrodaya... 84, 96, 103, 

158, 179, 184, 244. 
Chaitanya Charit... 90, 97, 103, 259. 
Chandrasekhar... 145, 150, 157, 171, 

225, 230. 
Chaipalli... 202,. 
Chandrakala... 235,. 
Change Charana... 247. 
Chang... 248. 
Christian... 268, 339, 340, 343,346, 

351, 352,401. 
Christianity... 307. 
Cham Darshan... 377. 
Chandvardai... 318. 
Chakradaha... 342. 
Chankidar... 348. 
ChandaTBhau... 374, 388- 
Chittagong... 44. 
Chitralekha... 90. 
Ghoranandi... 197. 



INDfiX 



407 



D. R. Bhandarkar... 211. 

Daivaki... 107. 

Daman... 200. 

Dasya... 27, 326, 328, 329,330,331, 

332. 

Dasaratha... 27, 37. 
Damodara...58,60, 64, 66, 67, 176, 188, 

190, 192, 289, 292, 305. 
Dacca.. .71, 139, 307, 350. 
Dacca CoUege...71. 
Dakha Dakslii...99, 125. 
Dorbhai>ga...l20. 
Dacca muslin ... 146. 
Daitya...l07. 
Dabirkhas...219. 
Damodar Swarup...239. 
Dandaa...262. 
pande...273. 
Darpanarayan. . .350. 
Darve3h...347. 
Deva Sarma...l7. 
Deocan...52, 63. 65, 86, 88, 184, 192, 

204, 209, 211, 294. 
Delhi .120,. 
Desha.. .384, 385, 386. 
Dehatatta...394, 395.. 
Deva gram... 348. 



Devajus...354. 
Dharma cult... 2, 
Dharma-literature...5. 
Dharma Mangal...5, 32. 
Dhnndi Ram Tirtha...l2. 
Dhamrai.. 71. 
Dhiiti...llO, 112, 131, 141. 
Dhira,..298. 
Dhiradhira...298. 
Dharma Worshippers... 307. 
Diamond Harbour... 278, 
Dibyonmad...314. 
Dom...9, 279,. 
Dolotsava.. .371,372. 
])oha8...302. 
Dontya...312. 
Dogachia ..346. 
Dobi...8. 

Dravidian languages,,. 29E. 
DurgaFrasad Kar...361. 
Durlabha Sar... 324. 
Dnrga Prasad. ..361. 
Dwaitadwaitavada...41, 321, 322, 323. 
bwaraka...204, 205, 211. 
D (varakadisb . . . 300. 
DwarnUa...300. 
Dwaitabad...322. 



'Eastern Bengal ... 39, 

238, 294. 
Eclal...l29. 
£kcbaka...36. 
Bkahhippaya...367. 



118, 125. 127, Emperor Akbnr..,318. 
English.. .71, 220,399. 
Emperor of Gou.,, 52,53, 57, 148. 
Europe... 268, 269. 
European... 61, 268,272,279,285. 



Fag.. .143, 370. 
Fakir... 350. 
Falgun...l09. 



Faridpnr...62, 126. 

Ferdauai...21. 

Fra8er...278. 



Gradigaccha...l52. 

Gangetio Valley... 14. 

Ganges. ..15, .J3, 99, 104, 111 
130, 135 140, 165, 166, 168, 
230, 249, 277, 299, 349, 396 

Gakul Gossain...l22. 

Gangadhar Pandit.. .84, 135, 293 



Ganga Das.. .90, 102, 114, 1J5, 118, 
144, 162. 
119, 123, Gayatri...26. 
170, 189, Ganes...41, 89, 120, 154. 

Gangadhar. ..49, 50, 117, 127, 131, 139, 

144, 159, 316. 
Gaya...90, 91, 128, 129, 187 



408 



i:fiJDEX 



Garanhati..,146. 

Ga.ndaB...24S. 

Ganriya Vaishiiabs...225. 

Gathali...227. 

Gaiur...237. 

Gavinda Ghoah.. 240, 291. 

Gaurapadatarangini ... 312. 

Ganrachaiidrika...312, 313, 315, 316. 

Gaelic. .334. 

Germans... 399. 

George Fox... 267. 

Geru...ll2. 

Ghat... 155. 

Ghora...204, 205, 209,. 

GhoshpaTa...344, 350, 391. 

Girisliwar...202. 

Gita...31, 111, 346. 

Gobra...360, 

Goyinda Gharan Basn,,.204. 

Goraksha Nath...23, 4. 

Goraksha Bijoy...3. 

GoTinda Charaii...204, 205, 277. 

Gopi Chandra. ..4, 64, 

Gopel bhoga...l76, 

Godavari...26, 210, 235, 273, 281. 

Goviuda Das. ..31, 63, 87-89, 95-97, 

107, 117, 165, 168, 179, 186, 194, 200, 

204, 210, 225, 234, 352, 377, 282, 283, 

294, 299, 315, 319. 
Goknl -.35. 
Govinda...38, 87, 123, 165, 168, 171, 

177, 187, 194, 201, 210, 213, 253, 256, 

275 
Gonr...52, 56, 178, 217, 219. 



Goatha-Songs...312. 
Gonra Emperor. ..57, 178. 
Gourapada tarangini...88. 
Gopinath...96, 117, 181, 247, 248, 249, 

260, 265. 
Govinda Ghosh. .97, 116, 144, 302. 
Gopal Basu...97. 
Gobrai..,349. 
Govinda Karmakar— 106, 124, 168, 

171, 191, 204, 277. 
Gopinath Aoh8xyya...ll6, 145, 185, 

244. 

Gopi Chandra. ..288. 
GodhnU...143. 
Gobardhan Das... 214. 
Gopal Bhatta...225, 290. 
Goswami...225, 284. 
Gopinath Kay... 246. 
Gobardhan ... 255. 
Gouridas...26B. 
jGopis...299, 323, 385. 
Gorai...l49. 
Greek... 61, 302, 307. 
Grow8e...318. 
Grantha Saheb...401. 
Gn2rat...l20. 
Gurjari...l45, 203. 
Guru Saiji... 347. 
Guru.. .285, 288, 318, 321, 340, 3t2, 

343, 344, 346, 347, 348, 354, 374, 375, 

377, 383, 385, 390-392, 400-402. 
GuriariRag...253. 
GDbhajuB...354. 
Gyasnddin...l7. 



Haripa...2. 

Harisiddha...3. 

Harihara-Balty , 5. 

Haflz...23, 177. 

Hari...38, 348. 

Haridas...47, 48, 49, 115, 142, 144. 
150, 151, 157, 193, 212, 242, 243, 249, 
250, 280, 281, 282, 292, 303, 369. 

Harichandra. 218, 248. 

Haribhakti Bilas...222, 289. 

Hallam...26S. 

Earitaki...302. 

Hari Balliiva Kar,..361 

Hall... 306. 

Hata Ghosh... 342. 

Hazrati...349. 

Hebrew... 302. 

Hira...4. , 



Hindu. ..8, 14, 17, 23, 27, 32, 52-57, 
145, 204, 220, 221, 278, 282, 298, 313, 
318, 338, 340, 343, 346-350, 352-354, 
372, 377, 378, 388, 392, 393, 400, 401. 

Hindu Renaissance... 11, 336, 338. 

Hinduism.. .11, 27, 335, 37a 

Hiranya Das... 214. 

Hindi. ..295, 318. 

Hindu JnriBprudenre...287. 

History of Bengali Language and 
Literature. ..313, 

History of the Mediesval Yaishnar 
Literature... 327. 

Haribola .211. 

Homer... 273, 

HriBhikesa...38. 

Hussain Shah... 52, 53, 55, 66, 57, 178, 
214, 218, 219, 221. 



INDEX 



409 



India... 3, 27, 31, 44, 62, 
99, 119, 141, 163, 169, 190, 
211, 222, 239, 292, 293, 294, 
392. 

Indian History ... 222. 

Indian Vernaonlars . 398. 

Indian Cupid. ..370. 

Indira Devi. ..202. 



63, Indradyamna Sarobara...256. 
210, Insurance office... 360. 
306, In toto...242. 

Ishan Nagar...98, 116, 294. 
Islam...l3, 32, 284. 
Iswar Bharati...293. 
IswarPuri...44, 50, 53, 54, 115, 116, 
117, 129, 131, 181, 193. 



Jagannatha...?, 76, 96, 102, 154, 181, 

186, 187, 235, 256, 260, 262, 263, 265. 
Jaksiia...I2. 

Jamuna. . . 17, 26, 33, 40, 69, 75, 168, 172, 
173, 227, 230, 243. 255, 257, 301, 394 

Jayananda...24, 88, 95, 97, 100, 102, 
109, 115, 125, 127, 132, 154, 178, 186, 

187, 233, 262, 264. 
Jasoda...34, 143. 
Janardana...38, 101, 154. 
Jagannath Misra... 99-101, 103-106, 

113, 115, 136. 
Jagabandhu Bhadra...88, 312. 
Jay Gopal Goswami...88, 89. 
Jajpur...lOi, l78, 392. 
Jayaram Chakrabartty...l25. 
Jagai...l53, 154, 155, 194. 
Jaleswar,..177. 
Jagannath Ballav...l86, 238. 
Japa...ll2, 288. 
Jaumasthami . . . 289. 
Jangal...218. 

Jagadananda...239, 242, 254, 354. 
Jaganath . . . 264. 



Jati-nasha . . . 285i 
Jaigir...249. 

Jadunandan Acharya...282. 
James.. .306. 
Jambu Dwipa...384. 
Japanese... 399. 
Jehangir...21. 
Jessore.,.47, 282, 350. . 
Jesus... 61, 62. 
JemeBWar...l77. 
Jewish... 105, 268. 
Jesus Christ. ..379. 

Jfaarikhanda...227. 
Jiva...99. 
Jiznri...202. 
Jiva 6oswami...290. 
Jnan..-.244, 322, 324, 325, 397. 
Jnanadi Sodhana...353, 388, 
Job... 105. 
JoydeT...7, 8, 19. 30, 31, 143, 146, 252, 

253302, 310, 323. 
Jonepur...392. 
Junior Hari1as...243. 
Jnthi...252, 314. 



Kanair Natsala, 135, 217, 218, 
Ealipa, 2. 
Kanohi, 120. 
Kannpa, 2, 

Eanchannagore, 167, 168, 176. 
Kamalkuraari, 196. 
Kaln Dom, 5. 
Kalinga, 7. 
Eanaraka, 8. 

Kali, 10, 11, 55, 299, 300, 301, 390. 
Kapalika, 13. 
Kanaraka, 178. 
Kanis, 23. 



Kansalya, 27, 107, 174. 
Kalia, 34, 301. 
Eansa, 36. 
Eamallochan, 178. 
Kanstava, 45. 
Kalatirtha, 202. 
Kamalakshya, 46. 
Kazi, 48, 54, 114, 149, 152, 153. 
Kafir, 48. 

Kashinath Ghattak, 128. 
Karoha, 82, 86, 87, 88, 94, 95, 97; 107, 
191, 192, 193, 204, 209, 225, 277, 294. 
Katwa, 92, 165, 167, 168, 171, 179. 



410 



INDEX 



Kavikarnapur, 130, 158, 180, 196, 197, 

234, 235, 244, 246, 259, 291. 
Eantakiiagore, 167. 
Kasiswar Nayaratna, 171 . 
Eaapin, 174. 
Kapila, 174. 
Kaahi Misra, 176, 214. 
karpnrkiipi, 187. 
Earnat, 234. 
Easishwar, 239. 
Eancbrapara, 244. 
Eamal Das, 277, 283. 
Earuna, 3&!. 
Ealidas, 279, 280. 
Eayastha, 279, 280, 285, 361. 
Eanai, 280. 
Eavyaprakasha, 294, 
Eahahantarita, 312. 
Eamranga, 382. 

Earta-Bhajas, 335, 336, 340, 343, 346, 
Earma, 324, 325. 
Eanaibazar, 36!. 
Eala, 384, 385, 386. 
Ealicharan, 3£5. 
Ealicharan Tarafdar, 366. 
Eali Tnga, 385. ' 

Katha Vathu. 366, 367. 
Eamdeva, 370, 371, 372. 
Eama, 371, 372. 

Eaviraj Parvaticharan Eavishekbar, 373. 
Eannpad, 302. 
Eeshava, 38, 167. 
Eeshava Bharati. 44, 161, 168, 
Eeshab Basa, 56, 219. 
Eesbab Easmiri, 119, 293, 294. 
Eeshab Samanta, 177. 
Ebadi'ja, 134. 
Ehanjanasharya, 212. 
Ehob, 172. 
Ehandava, 202. 
Ehardaba, 283, 284. 
Ebeturi, 285. 
Ehandita, 312. 
Ehoda, 390. 
Ehqsi Biswas, 348, 
Ebarar Cbar, 350 



Ehemasahasra, 361. 

Eimabar, 126. 

Eirfcan, 50, 139, 145, 146, 150, 151, 154, 
155, 162, 176, 186, 240, 260, 312, 315. 

Eing Fratap Budra, 234. 

Eilakincbit, 297, 

Eishori Bbajakas, e74, 376. 

Eotalipar, 126. 

Eowri, 147, 248. 

Eoran, 346. 

Erisbna Eeli, 123. 

Eranabbanga, 121, 

Erisbna, 9, 17, 19, 28, 29, 32-34, 36-39, 
42.44, 47, 63, 64, 66, 68, 69, 71-77, 80, 
83, 86, 88, 94, 97, 105, 110, 111, 117, 
118, 130-132, 143, 154, 155, 167-160, 
163, 164, 166, 168, 172, 176, 181, 193- 
195, 198, 199, 202, 203, 206, 207, 208, 
213, 214, 218, 220, 221, 225-228, 223, 
239, 242, 251, 252, 254-268, 267, 276, 
289, 297, 298, 301-303, 305, 312, 313- 
315, 319(16), 323, 329, 363, 369, 371, 
372, 385, 387, 390, 393, 394. 

Erisbna Eirtan, 9, 17, 18, 19, 22, 20 
30, 35, 371. 

Eshnadbamaliss, 9, 17, 30. 

Erisbnapada, 143. 

Erishnacbarn, 143. 

Erisbna Das, 46, 97, 212, 213, 228, 
237, 283. 

Erisbna Das Eaviraj, 94, 179, 183, 
210, 225, 230, 231, 337. 

Erisbna Lilamrita, 117. 

Erisbna Dasi, 374. 

Erisbna Eamal, 314, 

Erishna Eumar Gnnasagar, 346. 

Erisbnanagar, 346, 348. 

Erisbna-oulfc, 370. 

Eunda, 133,252. 

Eumarbatta, 131, 233. 

Eulia, 170, 233. 

Enmaries, 392. 

Enmbba Hela, 228. 

Enoran, 401. 

EuUnism, 352, 

Eusha, 140. 



Lakshman Sen, 7, 8. 
Lakban, 212. 
Laksmi, 22, 90, 122, 
Laur, 46, 47. 
Lauri Erishna Das, 98, 
Lalita Deri, 71. 
Lalita Bistara, 81. 



Lanka, 84. 
Lakhibai, 195. 
126, 127, 157. Lakbi, 196. 

Lalita Madbab, 238. 
Lalsashi, 389. 
Life of Akbar, 54. 
Ligna-tranea, 295. 



INDEX 



4U 



Lion-gate, 255, 256. Lokenath Goswami, 86. 

Loohau Das, 60, 81, 94, 97, 126, 132, Lord Carmiohael, 103. 
259, 263, 264, 324. Lokenath Lahin, 125. 

Lochan, 82, 159. Luther, 267. 



Mahanadi, 177. 

Madahukara Misra, 101. 

Mayniamati 3, 6, 5. 

Mailn, 7, 109, 157, 168. 

Madhnri, 153-156, 194. 

Manasa Devi, 9, 11. 

Mahayana, 10, 13, 14, 331, 334, 337, 
354, 370, 400. 

Mathoranath, 12. 

Mahaprasad, 12. 

•Madhuryya, 27, 326, 330. 

Mala Dhar Basn...36. 

Madhab...38, 42, 341, 343. 

Madhabi...242, 303. 

MadhnBudan . . . 88. 

Mahamahopadhya Ajitanath Naya- 
ratiia...l63. 

Madhavendra Puri..,40, 227. 

Magha...92, 165, 213, 228. 

Madhyacharya...41. 

Mathar Lila..,-12. 

Mathur...393. 

Mathura...42, 313, 315, 323. 

Madhavendra. ..44, 45. 
Madras Presidency. ..45, 277- 

Mahratta...46, 203, 211, 225, 226, 230. 

Mandira...l52, 172. 

Mahomedan...46, 48, 53, 56, 142, 178, 

212, 218—221, 228, 229, 249, 250, 281, 

282, 9S6, 290, 318, 334, 339, 340, ;i43, 

344, 346—351, 393, 401. 
Manashar Bha8faau...54. 
Mayapnr...55. 
Maya Devi. ..61. 
Mary.. .61, 62, 332. 
Mahomed... 62. 
Mahamahopadhya. . . 1 03. 
Mahabharat...l03, 104, 156. 
Madhyas...298. 
MaoNiohol...l22. 
Markandeya Chandi...l26. 
Mandar...l29. 
Mahomet-khadija. . .134. 
Manahar Shai...l44, 146. 
Madhumukhi. . . 149. 
Malaya lam... 295. 
Magnas Opns...222. 
Mahabir...222. 



Maithili...295. 

Maharajas... 236. 

Mad haryarasa . . . 273 . 

Mantras... 289, 344, 348. 

Madhab Bariii...341. 

Maya... 322, 323. 

Mainat...350. 

Man. ..312, 393. 

Mahayanism...352, 392. 

ManBingha...318. 

Madhyakhanda,,.324. 

Maha8ay...343. 

Malati...389. 

Manidas Babaji.,.392. 

Manindramohan Boss... 338. 

MadraBis...892. 

Mahayanist . . . 345 . 

Max Muller...398. 

Malapara...348 

Malliks...3. 

Madhyamio School. ..352. 

Mayna...361, 

Manomohini...361, 362, 363, 364, 365. 

Maulavi...401. 

Madanot3ava...370, 371. 

Mahaprabhu...391, 392. 

Madan...27l. 

Madan Mohan... 371. 

Marwarees ... 399. 

Maharsi Devendranath Tagore...236. 

Mediaeval Vaisnava Literature of 

Bengal... 286. 
Mela.. .228, 344. 
Meherpur...348. 
Minanatha...2, 3, 4. 
Minachetana...4. 
Mithila...l5. 
Middhi...41. 
Mira...206, 207. 
Mirhabool...56, 221. 
Miara...l02. 
Milan. ..312. 
Moslem Emperor... 20. 
Modus Operandi... 54. 
M ooharghanta ... 1 24. 
Mongorai...218. 
Mother-cult... 269. 
Mollah...402. 



412 



INDEX 



Mirdu ..298. Murari Gnpta...57,.59,'64, 94, ft?, 116, 

Mnnindra...90. 144, 159, 187, 212. 

Mnrari...37, 59— 62j,90, 103, 112,114, Mtnina...l94, 197, 277. 

116, 126, 192, 202, 239. Mukhara...298. 

Mukunda Datta.. 49, 50, 2J4, 246, Mugdha...298. 

263. Muohi...279. 

Mnknnda Saniaya...ll6, 135, 233. Mukti...244. 

Mukunda.. .50. 116, 117, 118, 164, 181, Muradpnr...350.. 

189, 239, 240, 246. ' Mudra Rakshasa. 

Mnla...2U0. Mnsalmans...377. 



Nababatarchestra...214. 

NaTmada...200. 

Naaik...200. 

Nath.cult...2, 3, 4. 

Nath-creed...2. 

Nathi8m...2, 3. 

Nath-literatnre ... 3. 

Nath-leader...3. 

Natli...4, 8. 

Narada...36, 137, 157, 158. 

Nagar...202. 

Xarattam Bilasha...lO, 98. 

Nadia...l2, 54, 56, 59, 60, 63, 65, 68— 

71, 73, 75, 83, 84, 91, 92, 94; 99, 100, 
102, 103, 108, 114, 116, 118—120, 122 

—126, 129, 131, 139, 141, 142,. 150— 
156, 161, 163—165, 170, 173). 179, 186, 
189, 190, 192, 194, 226, 232, 233, 243, 
244, 282, 293, 303, 304, 325, 348, 385. 

N'arahari Cbakrabarti — 98. 

NagarJDDjb. . . 13,, 362. 

Nagendranath 6apta...l5. 

Narahari Sircar... 16, 68, 97, 285,, 293. 

Narahari...29, 32, 49, 68— 70, 72, , 73, 
81, 92, 97, 113, 138, 141, 144, 145, 
155, 159, 212( 291, 316. 

Nanoor...I6. 

Naofoji...I97, 201. 

Nawab...l9, 53. 

Nakul...29. 

Narayan...38. 

Narayanpur ... 177. 

Nandanacbarya. . . 141. 

Naimisbaranya. . .75. 

KaTaji...204. 

Navadwip...82, 90, 119. 

Nanda...75, 143,202. 



Narayani.. 90, 109. 

Narendra Sarobar...256, 290. 

NaihaM...244. 

Naradiya Faraii...279. 

Narottam Das. ..285, 324, 326. 

Narottaia...286. 

Nayanananda...97. 

NaTa8ingba...286. 

Nagda...350. 

Nanak...401. 

Nera8...284, 345. 

Neris...284. 

Nera.Neris...284, 317, 318, 335. 

Nepal... 354. 

Nilambar...l06,.136. 

Nim...llO, 317. 

Niintree...255. 

Nityananda...36, 37, 64, 97, 125, Hli, 
144, 150; 151, 154, 159, 165, 173, 176, 
189, 190, 239, 240, 243, 245, 24fi, 278, 
283, 284—287, 291, 336. 

Nilambar Chakrabarty ..100, 103, 179; 

Niraai...l09— 136, 1^7, 150, 138^141, 
144, 145, 151, 152, 153, 154, 156—170, 
305. 

Nityananda Das... 98. 

Nimai Pandit. .116, 117, 120, IBl, 124, 
129, 146, 154, 159. 

Nitai Ghosh... 342. 

North Bengal.. .9, 17, 18. 

Nolak Babaji...71. 

Noyka Khanda...393. 

Non- Aryan... 370. 

North Western FrovinceB.,,392: 

Nrishinghananda ... 217. 

Nrishingha Chaturda8i...289. 

Narpur...l25. 



Ohio.. .305. 
Ojha8...127. 
Okra...lll. 
01denbnrg...398. 
Old Testament... 105, 



Orient. ..295. 

Ori88a...32, 44, 62, 54,56, 90, 101, 1«, 

184, 210, 213, 219, 261,. 291, 391^ 

393. 
Oriya...295. 



INDEX 



4ia 



Panoa Nara Singha...202. 

Fadiniiii...6, 7. 

Pargana ..145. 

Padtuavati...?. 

ParTati...8, 9, 41. 

Pabanadata...8. 

Pal Kings... II, 38. 

Pali.. .113, 293, 295, 367. 

Fada Kalpatara...l5. 

Panohanan Vedantik...l7l. 

Padnia...l25. 

Pandit Gangadhara...91. 

Padmanava ... 38. 

Padavali...44, 258. 

Pathan...52, 53, 54. 

Pal Rajas... 64. 

Papahara...l78. 

Farameswar Das... 97. 

Pandit Ganga Oas...l!3. 

Pandit Sanatan...l28. 

Fardaaga...l52. 

Pandit.. .32, 103, 135, 137, 151, 234. 

Panohahati...200. 

Pandas. ..22], 325. 

Fan jab... 293. 

Fathan Nawab...228. 

Panchatattyakbyan ...231. 

Panihati...233. 

Paramananda Sen... 244. 

Padodak...255, 256. 

Fakkhas...263. 

Fadmakot...300. 

Pandit Khirodchandra' Goswami..,336. 

Parari...342. 

Pagalnathe...34g, 350. 

Fagal Eanai...350. 

Pargana Ita...36I. 

Far7atiobarau...374, 396. 

Patra...384,385, 886. 

Patvis...349. 

Feshwar...205. 



Pedo...l87. 

Persian... 220. 

Fingal's Prakrit Grammar.;. 293. 

Pinda...l38; 129. 

Pirili Brahmins. ..54, 90. 

Pitri Matri...26. 

Firalla...52. 

Fiohilda...218. 

Foona...31, 63, 202. 

Pragalvas...298. 

Prince Lonsen,..5. 

Pradyumna...38. 

Frahlad...l34, 137. 

PratapBndra...32, I45,;184, 185, 186, 
210, 221, 234, 235, 236, 246, 247. 

Frabhu Jagatbandhu...62. . 

Premabilasa...92, 98,, 246, 252. 

Prakasananda...225, 230, 231, 232, 293. 

Prakrit... 295. 

PraohyavidyamahaEnava Nagendra- 
nath Basn...262. 

Frembhakti Chandrika...324, 326. 

Pranam...362, 365. 

Premadas...97. 

Pr6ma...371, 372. 

Prakritio...372. 

FraTartaka...384, 385. 

Punuruktabadbhasa ...121. 

Pari... 7, 8, 12, 44, 60, 83, 84, 96, 145, 
176, 178, 180,: 184, 186, 188-190, 191, 
192, 202, 211, 212, 213, 217, 219, 220, 
221, 223, 224, 233, 234, 235, 237, 238, 
239, 2*0, 243! 244, 245, 248, 253, 254, 
257, 260, 280, 281, 286, 304, 352. 

Farusfaottaina...38, 125. 

Fundarik Vidya Nidhi...44, 49. 

Purandara...l02. , 

Pari Ba3a..:235. 

Purba Raga..,312. 

Parana... 366. 

Pnspostava...370. 



Quakers... 306. 



Q 



Bamgiri...I93, 197- 

Rame8war...9, 211. 

Batnagarba. . .136. 

BaDgpore...9. 

Kagbnnath Das... 213,216, 238,279,292. 



Kadha...9, 28, 29, 40, 68, 90, 157, 267, 
310, 312, 313-3)6, 323, 325, 372, 377, 
386, 393, 394. 397. 

Eaia...l5, 193, 209, 210, 234, 235, 248. 

Eami...l6, 20, 22, 24, 25, 26, 29, 355. 



414 



IKDEX 



Radhakrishna...l7, 312, 313, 314, 315, 

316, 368, 372, 373, 393, 396. 
Raiiiananda...36, 205, 277, 338. 
Bamananda Basn...204. 
Bamanuja...37. 
Raghu...216. 

Ram. ..37, 84, 86, 174, 220, 289, 310. 
Ram Das. ..37, 212. 
Bam Eai...l84, 186, 2r0, 218, 235, 238, 

242, 244, 245, 248, 257, 281, 287, 297. 
Raja Pratap Riidra...52, 178, 184, 213, 

217, 218, 257, 265. 
Eamohandra Khan. ..52, 177, 178. 
Bamkeli,..56, 178, 218, 234. 
Ramkrishna Paramabmsa...62. 
Ramkrisliua...62, 296. 
Raghunath...67, 153, 154, 214, 215. 
Ravana...83. 
Raksbasa...84. 
Rajendranath Bay. ..62. 
Raja BhTamarabara...l01. 
Kaghnnandan ... 100. 
Baghanath Siromani...lOO. 
Rai Sekhar...97. 
Bajshahi...285. 
Rajput... 228. 
Baghab Pandit. ..233. 



Ramananda Ray. ..239, 246, 256, 291, 292. 
Ratbajatra. . . 240. 
Bamnabami . . . 289 
Rasa. ..270, 327. 
Raja of Fakkapalli...286. 
Radhamohan...312, 316. 
Radba songs... 3 16. 
Ramayan...338. 
Rarasaran Pal. ..342. 
RamabaUavi...346, 390. 
Badba-tantra...372. 
Rai-Kann...372. 

Bai Sahib Nagendranath Va8u...393. 
RabindrH nath. . . 395. 
Ramvallabhins. . .401. 
Eemiina...44, 
Remiti...l46. 
Red River, Ohio... 305. 
Rbys Devid...398. 
Rishi...75, 130. 
Rissa-Culla...212. 
Rowile...250. 
Rupanaray an ... 1 5. 

Rupa...42, 219, 220, 222, 237, 254, 280, 
291, 292, 294, 297, 298, 318, 337. 
Bnpa Go8wami...44. 
Budrapati...209. 



s 



Saivism ..2. 

Sandhya-bhaoaha...4, 245, 335, 389,403. 

Sarbat...l87. 

Sevadasi...7. 

Santipur...49, 88, 108, 173, 176, 178, 

179, 189, 282, 284, 350. 
Sahitya Parisat.. .8,19,262, 312. 
Sandhi,tirtha...202. 
Sahaya Dharma. . . . 10, 335, 
Sanyasis...l2, 13. 86, 104, 105, 106. 

125, 141, 162, 164, 165, 167, 169. 170, 

171, 173,-175, 181, 184, 185, 188, 197, 

202, 205, 209, 210, 217, 218- 220, 225, 

228, 231, 234, 242, 275, 282. 304, 325. 
Sanskrit. ..12, 29,37, 44, 57,84,103, 

104, 113, 114, 117, 125, 130, 132, 204, 

220, 238, 244, 291, 294-297. 
Sarvat8...13. 
Sarbabhaum,..66, 179, 180,246, 291, 

293. 

Samauddin II. ..22, 23. 
Samsnddin Bhengara...22. 
Sac)ii Devi.. .23, 99, 102. 104, 105, 106, 

122, 123, 126, 128, 132, 161, 162, 165, 

166, 167, 173, 233. 
Sari...9, 26, 204. 
SaTaswati...26. 



Sakhya...27, 226, 228, 229, 230, 231, 

326, 328, 329, 330, 331. 
Subarmarekha. . . 177. 
Sarap...l92. 
Saptagram ... 21 4, 279. 
Saka...46, 60,103,109, 134,137,168, 

211, 213, 259, 262, 263. 
Sadhu...l97, 204, 211, 249, 361, 362, 

363, 364, 365, 366, 367. 
Sankirtan...56, 144, 162. 
Sanatan...56, 79, 128, 219,-222, 230, 

237, 249, 254, 281, 282, 287, 288-292, 

318, 320, 324, 337, 347. 
Saohi...63, 7o, 84, 106, 109,112,132, 

133, 134, 167, 175. 
Satirmata...66. 
Satyabai...l95. 
Sanyasa...70, 82,83, 92, 94,104,106, 

108, 161, 168, 170, 171, 181, 191, 192, 

211, 245, 275, 302, 304, 312. 
Sarupa Damodar...216. 
San<iipani...75. 
Sakutabhanjana...76. 
Sarpuria ..187. 
Sashi mukhi...96, 167. 
Sadananda Purl. ..202. 
Sankararanga Puri...l04. 



IKDEX 



415 



SaBtri...l88. 

Sakar Mallik...291. 

Sama...2g8. 

Sankara...242, 244, 256,322,323, 324. 

Sambhuchand . . .377. 

Sadhaka...285, 384. 

Santa.. .326, 327, 328,3.9. 

Samaj...380. 

Sahajia cult. ..339, 355,388, 40i. 

Sahajias...3l7, 318, 335, 337, 338,339, 

340, 341, 346, 347, 349, 350, 351, 352- 

360, 361, 367, 369, 373, 374, 387, 388, 

390, 391, 393, 394, 401, 403. 
Sastrio...320. 
Sastras...321. 
Saheb Ohani...346. 
S»ddhini...347. 
Sahajia garas...396, 397. 
Sabitri...357. 
Sahaja Desha... 359. 
Sadhu charit...361. 
Santa Dasi ..361 
Sekhara...235. 
Sen kings. ..37, 125. 
Sevadasi...?, 253. 
Shivadi ghrita,..132. 
Shah... 57. 

Shekha — Subhoifeya. . .7. 
Shaiva...204. 
Sher Afgan...21. 
Shakespeare . . . 274. 
Shai...377. 

Shaivat...306, 307, 308. 
ShifSgram...346. 
SiTeswar...l78. 
Siddha...2, 3, 384. 
Sir E. G. Bhandarkar...36. 
Siva. ..8, 9, 11,41, 64, 297. 
Sisir Kumar Ghosh... 88. 
Sita...l09, 111, 157, 175, 310, 357. 
Sikhi— Mahiti...242. 
Sibananda Sen... 244. 
Sivananda...283, 377. 
Sir Rabindranath Tagore...395. 
Sikh. ..401. 
Skanda...32, 35, 36. 
Sloka...45, 136, 238. 
Somnath...209. 
SotuheraIndia...l2,31,37,39, 87,89, 189, 

190, 193, 203, 209-211, 234, 252, 294, 295. 



Sonoria Brahmin. ..227. 

Solomon... 268. 

Songs of songs... 302. 

Spastabadini . . . 350. 

Srikhanda...60, 68,212,285. 

Srimin...l57. 

Sriman Pandit. ..49, 131, 133. 

Srivas...49, 109, 110, 133-135, 139, 141, 

144, 146, 157, 158, 162, 163, 166, 174, 

187, 233, 240, 252, 263, 285. 
Sr!dhara...38, 49, 147, 150, 241. 
Sriparvat...45. 
Sri Ramkri8hna...62. 
Sridhar S\vami...211. 
Srad...392. 

Srinath Mukhopadhyay...346. 
Stewart... 23. 
St. Paul.. .61, 81. 
Sterling... 184. 
St. John.. .81. 
St. Juan of the Cross... 268 
St. Teresa of Foligno...268. 
St. Angelo of Foligno.,,268. 
Stula...384. 

Subhananda Ray. ..153. 
Sumeru...l69, 311. 
Sultan Mahmnd...21. 
Sultan Gayasuddin...23. 
Sultan Assalatwia...23. 
Subuddhi Ray. ..57. 
Sudarsan...lI3. 
Sukta...l24. 
Subarnagram . . . 125. 
Suklambar Brahmachari . . . 1 33. 
Suklambara ... 133. 
Sudr»...279, 282.286. 
Subarnabanik...283. 
Suapur... 07. 
Safis...304. 
Sunya Pnran...393. 
Sunya Murti...345. 
Sungod...392. . 
Suttees... 357. 

Svarnp Damodar's note. ..97. 
Swarup Damodar,...210, 239, 257. 
Swami...241. 
Swarnpa...248,252, 253,256, 259, 294, 

297, 315. 

S wapnabilas ... 314. 
Sylhet...99, 106, 114, 125, 361. 



Tabor.. .50, 152. 

Tamal...41, 310. 

Tamil. ..204, 211, 294, 295. 



Tanseu...318. 

Tantrio ..6, 7, 10, 13, 171, 352, 353, 

372, 374, 396. 



416 



INDEX 



Taiitrici8m...6, II. 

TaiitrickB...27S. 

Tapaiu Ii[i8ra...225, 230. 

Tapti...200. 

Tarpan 349. 

Telegu...l20, 29.'5, 392. 

Telegua...392. 

Tennyson, ..71, 

Tibel...l20. 

TilakdaBi...350. 

Tirodhaii..,260, 263, 264. 

Tirfcharam...l94, 195, 196, 

Tithi...262 263, 264. 

ToI...113, lis, 116, 118, 122, 125 



135, 



136, 163, 233, 294. 
Tole...75. 
Trioliinopoli...202. 
Triinanda...l93. 
Trinabarta...34. 
Taipadi...l2. 
Tripatra...l2, 193. 
Tritya Pruahar...263. 
Trivanoore...209. 
Tukaram...211. 

Tnlai...53, 58, 80, 132, 207, 208, 288. 
Tandetandabani etc.... 238, 297, 
Typieal Sebetions from old Bengali 
Literatare...353, 319. 



XJddharaa Diitta...283 292. 

Udi8i...41. 

Ula...341. 

Unuka...l3. 

Unde8tood...267, 305, 306, 307 374, 

[Jpakarika,..173. 

UpaniBhadB...181, 226, 366. 



U'pendra...36, 
Upendra Misra...l06, 126. 
Upper India... 223, 224, 234, 
295. 

Urbashi...84. 

Uriya...235, 236, 239, 246, 247. 
Uriya Baja...2I8. 



244, 



Vaidya...l4S, 225. 

Vaisnava...7, 16, 17, 23i 24, 27, 29, 30, 
40, 41, 45, 47, 48, 60, 77, 78, 79, 80, 
81, 85, 109, 116, 125, 133, 135. 138, 
143, 145, 146, 151, 161, 172, 196, 203 
204, 216, 300, 305, 307, 308, 309, KlI 
312, 314 315, 316, 317, 318, 323. 

VaiBhnab...224, 225, 227, 229, 236, 
238, 244, 245, 251, 258, 260, 261, 262, 
264, 270, 271, 272, 273, 279, 283, 285, 
286 287, 288, 389, 290, 296. 

Vaishnab gOBwamiB... 

Vaishnava gariiB ..318 377. 

VaishDava Jurisprudence. ..320. 

VaishnaviBm...6, 31, 37, 46, 50, 95, 142, 
184, 219, 221, 222, 242, 249, 282j 286, 
287, 325, 334, 373, 374, 393, 3^9. 

Valadev Bhattacharya...63. 

Vali...l30. 

Valmiki... 27,273, 310. 

'V'amana...39. 

Varouoh...200. 

Vashu Derv...38, 54, 844, 212. 

Vashndev-Sarbabhaum ... 54. 

Va8bnghoah...l65. 



\^atsalya...326, 329. 330, 331. 

Vedauta Philofophy...l82, 294, sls. 

Vedas...353, 388. 

Vedic age... 269. 

Vedio Aryans... 249. 

Tedio Brahmin ... 101 

Vetoria...23. 

Tidyapati...l5, 16, 17, 23, 69, 143, 

145, 266, 295, 

Vidy abachaapati ... 54. 

Vidya Nagar...l(6. 

Vidyaaagar...llS, 118, 294. 

Vidyonmadtarangini. . . 336. 

Visurad...54. 

Vishnu... 36, 37, 83, 84, 86, 88, 93, 

128, 130, 132, 156, 104,208, 213. 
Vishnu priya...82. 
Vianu Pundit. ..113. 
Vitadra...I25. 
Vivarta- Vilas ... 337. 
Von lfeor...54. 
Vrindaban...237, 386. 
Vrind groves... 33, 42, 43, 57, 173, 

323, 377, 386 385. 
Vyas...l37. 323. 



INDEX 



417 



Ward. ,.338. 

WeBlyan Revival ..305. 



w 



Western Asia. ..21. 
Weatern Bengal.., 53, 349. 



Toga.. .4, 6, 341, 359, 
Yogi. ..4, 5, 97. 



Togini...29. 



Zemindar.,, 23. 



z 

ZoroaBter...61. 



OPIINIOINS 

" HISTORY OF THE BENGALI LANGUAGE AND 

LITERATURE " (IN ENGLISH) 

By 

RAI SAHIB DINESH CHANDRA SEN, B.A. 

Published by 

CALCUTTA UNIVERSITY 

Price— Rs. 12. Demy 8vo, pp. 1030, with illustrations. 

HIS EXCELLENCY LORD HAEDINGB OF PENSHURST in his 
Convocation Address, dated the 16th March, 1912, as Chancellor of the 
Calcutta University : — 

"During the last four years also the University has, from time to 
time, appointed Readers on special subjects to foster investigation of 
important branches of learning amongst our advanced students. One 
of these Readers, Mr, Sen, has embodied his lectures on the History 
of Bengali Language and Literature from the earliest times to the 
middle of the 19th century in a volume of considerable merit, which 
he is about to supplement by another original contribution' to the 
history of one of the most important vernaculars in this country. 
May I express the hope that this example will be followed elsewehere 
and that critical schools may be established for the vernacular lan- 
guages of India which have not as yet received the attention that 
they deserve." 

HIS EXCELLENCY LORD CARMICHAEL, GOVERNOR OF 
BENGAL, in his address on the occasion of his laying the Foundation 
stone of the Romesh Chandra Saras wat Bhawaii, dated the 20th 
November, 1916 : — 

" For long Romesh Chandra Dutt's History of the Literature of 
Bengal was the only work of its kind available to the general reader. 
The results of further study in this field have been made available to 
us by the publication of the learned and luminous lectures of Rai 
Sahib Dineschandra Sen. * * Ie the direction of the History 
of the Langu8,ge and the Literature, Rai Sahib Dineschandra Sen has 
created the necessary interest by his Typical Selections. It remains 
for the members of the Parithad to follow this lead and to carry on the 
work in the same spirit of patient accurate research." 

SIR ASUTOSH MOOKERJEE, in his Convocation Address, dated 
the 13th March, 1909, as Vioe-Chancellor of the Calcutta University : — 

" We have had a long series of luminous lectures from one of our 
own graduates, Babu Dineschandra Sen, on the fascinating subject of 
the History of the Bengali Language and Literature. These lectures 
take a comprehensive view of the development of our vernacular, and 
their publication will unquestionably facilitate the historical investi- 
gation of the origin of the vernacular literature of this country, the 
study of which is avowedly one of the foremost objects of the New 
Regulations to promote." 



410 OPINIONS 

STLVAIN LEVI (Paris)—" I cannot give you praises enough— your 
work is a Ghintamani — a Ratnakara. No book about India would I 
compare with yours Never did I find snoh a realistic sense of litera- 
ture Pundit and Peasant, Yogi and Raja, mix together in a Shakes- 
pearian way on the stage you have built up." 

BARTH (Pom) — " I can approach your book as a. learner, not 
as a judge." 

C. H, TAWNET — "Your work shows vast research and much 
general culture." 

VINCENT SMITH — " A work of profound learning and high value." 
P. W. THOMAS — " Characterised by extensive erudition and inde- 
pendent research." 

E. J. RAFSON — "I looked through it with great interest and 
great admiration for the knowledge and research to which it bears 
witness." 

F. H. SKRINB — " Monumental work — I have been revelling in the 
book which taught me much of which 1 was ignorant." 

B. B. HAVELL — " Most valuable book which every Anglo-Indian 
should read. I congratulate you most heartily on your very admirable 
English and perfect lucidity of style." 

D. C. PHILLOT — " I can well understand the enthusiasm with 
which the work was received by scholars, for even to men unacquainted 
with your language, it cannot fail to be a source of great interest and 
profit." 

L. D. BARNETT — " 1 congratulate you on having accomplished such 
an admirable work." 

G. HULTZTJH — " Mr. Sen's valuable work on Bengali literature, a 
subject hitherto unfamiliar to me, which I am now reading with great 
interest." 

J. P> BLUMHARDT — " An extremely well-written and scholarly 
production, exhaustive in its wealth of materials and of immense value." 

T, W. RHYS DAVIDS — " It is a most interesting and important 
work and reflects great credit on your industry and research.'' 

JULES BLOCH (Ports)— "Your book I find an admirable one and 
which is the only one of its kind in the whole of India," 

WILLIAM ROTHBNSTEIN— " I found the book surprisingly full of 
suggestive information. It held me bound from beginning to end, in 
spite of my absolute ignorance of the la;nguage of which you write 
with obviously profound scholarship." 

EMILE SEN ART {Paris)—" I have gone through your book with 
lively interest and it appears to me to do the highest credit to your 
learning and method of working." 

HENRY VAN DYKE- (P. S. A.)—" Your instructive pages which 
are full of new suggestions in regard to the richness and interest of the 
Bengali Language and Literature." 

C. T.WINCHESTER -(17. S. A.) ''A work of profound learning 
on a theme which demands the attention of all Western scholars." 

Prom a long review in the TIMES LITERARY SUPPLEMENT, 
Londoti, June 20, 1912 — " In his narration, as becomes one who is Wie 
soul of scholarly candour, he tells those, who can reed him with 



OPINIONS 4ll 

aympatby and imagination more abont the Hindu mind and its attitude 
towards life than we can gather from 50 volumes of impressions of 
travel by Europeans. Loti's picturesque account of the rites practised 
in Travancore temples, and even M. Chevrillon'a synthesis of much 
browsing in Hindu Scriptures, seem faint records by the aide of this 
unassuming tale of Hindu literature — Mr. Sen may well be proud of 
the lasting monument he has erected to the literature of his native 
Bengal." 

From a long review in the ATHBN^UM, March, 16, 1912—" Mr. 
Sen may justly congratulate himself on the fact that in the middle age 
he has done more for the history of his national language and literature 
than any other writer of his own or indeed any time." 

From a long review in the SPECTATOR, June 12, 1912—" A book 
of extraordinary interest to those who would make an impartial study 
of the Bengali mentality and character — a work which reflects the 
utmost credit on the candour, industry and learning of its author. 
In its kind bis book is a masterpiece-^modest, learned, thorough and 
sympathetic. Perhaps no other man living has the learning and happy 
industry for the task he has successfully accomplished." 

From a review by Mb. H, BEVBRIDGB in the Royal Asiatic 
Society's Journal, Jan., 1912 — " It is a very full and interesting account 
of the development of the Bengali Literature. He has a power of 
picturesque writing. ..his descriptions are often eloquent." 

From a long review by S. K. RATCLIFFE in "India," London, 
March 15, 1912 — " There is no more competent authority on the subject 
than Mr. Dineschandra Sen. The great value of the book is in its 
full and fresh treatment of the pre-English era and for this it would 
be difficult to give its author too high praise." 

From a long review by H. KERN in the Bijdragen of the Boyal 
Institute for Taal (translated by Dr. Kern himself) — "Fruit of investi- 
gation carried through many years... highly interesting book... the 
reviewer has all to admire in the pages of the work, nothing to criticise, 
for his whole knowledge is derived from it." 

From a review by De. OLDENBERG in the Frarikfwrter Zeitung, 
December 3, 1911 (translated by the late Dr. Thibaut)— " It is an 
important supplementation of the history of modern Sanskrit Litera- 
ture. The account of Chaitanya's influence on the poetical literature 
of Bengal contributes one of the moat brilliant sections of the work." 

From a review in DEUTSCHE RUNDSCHAN, April, 1912— "The 
picture which this learned Bengali has painted for us with loving care 
of the literature of his native land deserves to be received with atten- 
tive and grateful respect." 

From a review in LUZAC'S ORIENTAL LIST, London, May-June, 

1912 " A work of inestimable value, full of interesting information, 

containing complete account of the writings of Bengali authors from 
the earliest time... It will undoubtedly find a place m every Oriental 
Library as being the most complete and reliable standard work on the 
Bengali Language and Literature." 

From a review in the INDIAN MAGAZINE, London, Angnrt, 1912— 
" For Mr Sen's erudition, his sturdy patriotism, his mstructive percep- 
tion of the finer qualities in Bengali life and literature, the reader of 
his book must have a profound respect if ' he is to understand what 
modem Bengal is." 



41? OPINIONS 

From a long review in the MADRAS MAIL, May 9, 1912— "A survey 
of the evolution of the Bengali letters by a student so competent, bo 
exceptionally learned, can hardly fail to be an important event in the 
world of criticism. 

From a long review in the PIONEER, May 5, 1912—" Mr. Sen is a 
typical student such as was common in mediaeval Europe — a lover of 
learning for learning's sake. ..He must be a poor judge of characters 
who can rise from a perusal of Mr. Sen's pages without a real respect 
and liking for the writer, for his sincerity, his industry, his enthusiasm 
in the cause of learning." 

From a review in ENGLISHMAN, April 23, 1912—" Only one who 
has completely identified himself with the subject could have mastered 
it so well as the author of this imposing book." 

From a review in the EMPIRE, August 31, 1918—" As a book of 
reference Mr. Sen's work will be found invaluable and he is to be 
congratulated on the result of his labours. It may well be said that 
he has proved what an English enthusiast once said that ' Bengali ' 
unites the mellifluousness of Italian with the power possessed by 
German for rendering complex ideas." 

From a review in the INDIAN ANTIQUARY, December, 1912, by 
F. G. PARGITER: " This book is the outcome of great research and 
study, on which the author deserves the warmest praise. Ho has 
explained the literature and the subjects treated in it with such 
fnlnsBB and in such detail as to make the whole plain to any reader. 
The folk-literature, the structure and style of the language, metre 
and rhyme, and many misoellaueoos points are discussed in valuable 
notes. The tone is calm and the judgments appear to be generally 
fair." 

BANGA SAHITTA FABICHATA. 

OR 

TYPICAL SELECTIONS FROM OLD 
BENGALI LITERATURE. 

BT 

Bai Sahib Dineschaudra Sen, B.A. 

2 vols, pp. 1914, Royal 8vo, with an Introduction in English running 
over 99 pages, published by the University of Calcutta. 

{With 10 coloured illustrations. Price Rs. 12.) 

SIR GEORGE GRIERSON— " Invaluable work That I have yet 

read through its 1900 pages I do not pretend, but what I have read 
has filled me with admiration for the industry and learning displayed. 
It is a worthy sequel to your monumental History of Bengali Litera- 
ture, and of it we may safely say " finis coronat opus." How I wish 
that a similar work could be compiled for other Indian languages, 
specially for Hindi." 

E. B. HAVELL — " Two monumental volumes from old Bengali 
Literature. As I am not a Bengali scholar, it is impossible for roe to 
appreciate at their full value the splendid results of your scholarship 
and research, but I have enjoyed reading your luminous and most 
instructive introduction which gives a clear insight into the subject. 



OPINIONS 418 

I was also very muoh interested in the illustrations, the reprodnotion 
of which from original paintings is very suooessful and creditable to 
Swadeshi work." 

H. BBVERIDGB— " Two magnificent volumes of the Banga Sahitya 

Faricha;a I have read with interest Rasa Sundari's autobiography 

in your extracts." 

F. H. SKRINE— " The two splendid volumes of Banga Sahitya 
Pariohaya I aui reading with pleasure and profit. They are a credit 
to your profound learning and to the University which has given them 
to the world." 

From a long review in THE TIMES LITERARY SUPPLEMENT, 
London, November 4, 1916 — " In June, 1912, in commenting on Mr. 
Sen's History of Bengali Language and Literature, we suggested that 
work might usefully be supplemented by an anthology of Bengali 
prose and poetry. Mr. Sen has for many years been occupied with 
the aid of other patriotic students of the mediaeval literature of Bengal 
in collecting manuscripts of forgotten or half-forgotten poems. In 
addition to these more or less valuable monuments of Bengali poetic 
art, the chief popular presses have published great masses on literary 
matter, ohiefiy religious verse. It can hardly be said that these piles 
of written and printed matter have ever been subjected to a critical 
or philological scrutiny. Their very existence was barely known to 
the Europeans, even to those who have studied the Bengali Language 
on the spot. Educated Bengalis themselves, until quite recent times, 
have been too busy with the arts and sciences of Europe to spare 
much time for indigenous treasures. That was the reason why we 
suggested the compiling of a critical chrestomathy for the benefit not 
only of European but of native scholars. The University of Calcutta 
prompted by the eminent scholar Sir Asutosh Mookerjee, then Vioe- 
Chancellor, had already anticipated this need it seems. It had shrunk 
(rightly, we think) from the enormous and expensive task of printing 
the MSS. recovered by the diligence and generosity of Mr. Sen and 
other inquirers and employed Mr. Sen to prepare the two bulky volumes 
now before us. The Calcutta Senate is to be congratulated on its 
enterprise and generosity." 

From a review in The ATHEN^UM, January 16, 1915- " We have 
already reviewed Mr. Sen's History of Bengali Language and Litera- 
ture and have rendered some account of his previous work in Bengali 
entitled Banga Bhasa Sahitya, Mr. Sen now supplies the means 
of checking his historical and critical conclusions in a copious collection 

of Bengali verse Here are the materials carefully arranged and 

annotated with a skill and learning such as probably no one else living 
can command." 

From a review by Mr. F. G-. PARGITER— in the Royal Asiatic 
Society's Journal—" These two portly volumes of some 2,100 pages 
are an anthology of Bengali poetry and prose from the 8th to the 
l9th century and are auxiliary to the same author's History of Bengali 
Language and Literature which was rtviewed by Mr. Beveridge in 
this Journal for 1912 The Vice-Chancellor of the Calcutta Uni- 
versity who was consulted, decided that the best preliminary measure 
would be to make and publish typical selections. The University 
then entrusted that duty to Babu Dinesh Chandra Sen ; this work 
is the outcome of his researches. There can be no question that 
Dinesh Babu was the person most competent to undertake the task 
and in these two volumes we have without doubt a good presentment 
of typical specimens of old Bengali literature The style of the 



414) OPINIONS 

big book is excellent, its printing is fine, and it is embellished witli 
well-ezecnted reproductions in colour of some old paintings. It has 
also a copious index. 

The 
VAISNAVA LITERATURE OF MEDI/EVAL BENQAL 

[Being lectures delivered as Reader to the University of 
Calcutta.] 

RAI SAHIB DINBSH CHANDRA SEN, B.A. 
Demy 8vo, 357 pages 

WITH A PBBFACE BY 

J. D. ANDERSON, Esq., I.O.S. (Retired) 

Price Bs. 2 only 

SIR GEORGE GRIERSON.— Very valuable book I am reading 

it with the greatest interest and am learning much from it, 

WILLIAM ROTHENSTEIN.— I was delighted with jour book, 
I cannot tell yoii how touched I am to be reminded of that side of 
your beloved country which appeals to me moat — a side of which I 
was able to perceive something during my own too short visit to India. 
In the faces of the best of your oountryiuen I was able to see that 
spirit of which you write so charminely in your book. I am able to 
recall these faces and figures as if they were before me. I hear the 
tinkle of the temple-bells along the ghats of Benares, the voices of 
the women as they sing their sacre I songs crossing the noble river in 
the boats at sunset and I sit onco more with the austere Sanyasin 
friends I shall never, 1 fear, see more. But though I shall not look 
upon the face of India again, the vision I had of it will fill my eyes 
through life, and the love I feel for your country will remain to enrich 
my own vision of life, so long as I am capable of using it. Though I 
can only read you in English, the spirit in which you write is to me so 
true an Indian spirit, that it shines through our own idiom, and carries 
me, I said before, straight to the banks of your sacred rivers, to the 
bathing tanks and white shrine and temples of your well remembered 
villages and tanks. So once more I send you my thanks for the magic 
carpet you sent me, upon which my soul can return to your dear land. 
May the songs of which you write remain to fill this land with their 
fragrance 5 yon will have use of them, in the years before you, as we 
have need of all that is best in the songs of our own seers in the dark 
waters through which we are steering. 

The Vaisnava Literature of Mediaeval Bengal. By Rai Sahib 
Dineschandra Sen. (Calcutta : — The University.) 

Though the generalisation that all Hindus not belonging to modem 
reform movements are Saivas or Vaisnavas is much too wide, there 
are the two main divisions in the bewildering mass of sects which 
make up the 217,000,000 of Hindus, and at many points they overlap 
each other. The attempts made in the 1901 Census to collect informa- 
tion regarding sects led to such unsatisfactory and partial reiults that 
they were not repeated in the last decennial enumeration. But it is 
unquestionable that the Vaisnavas — the worshippers of Krishna — are 
dominant in Bengal, owing to the great success of the reformed cult 
estabiished by Ohaitanya, a contemporary of Martin Luther. The 



OPINIONS 415 

doctrine of Bhakti or religious devotion, which he taught still flourishes 
in Bengal, and the four lectures of the Reader to the University of 
Calcutta in Bengali here reproduced provide an instructive guide to its 
expression in the literature of the country during the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries. The first part of the book is devoted to the 
early period of Vaisnava literature, dating from the eleventh century. 
The Bai Sahib is filled with a most patriotic love of his nation and 
its literature, and has done more than any contemporary countryman 
to widen our knowledge of them. His bulky volume recording the 
history of Bengali Language and Literature from the earliest times to 
the middle of the nineteenth century is accepted by Orientalists as the 
most complete and authoritative work on the subject. 

There is refreshing ingenuousness in his claim, " my industry has 
been great," and the " forbearing indulgence " for which he asks if he 
has failed from any lack of powers, will readily be granted in view of 
the enthusiasm for his subject which somewhat narrows the strictly 
critical value of his estimates, but does not impair the sustained human 
interest of the book. 

Ghaitanya clearly taught, as these pages show, that the Krishna of 
the Mahabharata, the great chieftain and ally of the Pandava brothers, 
was not the Krishna of Brindaban. The latter, said the reformer, to 
Bnpa, the author of those masterpieces of Sanskrit drama, the Yidagdha 
Madhava and the Lalita Madhava, was love's very self and an embodi' 
ment of sweetness : and the more material glories of Mathura should 
not be confused with the spiritual conqnestfr of Brindaban. The 
amours of Krishna with Badha and the milkmaids of Brindaban are 
staple themes of the literature associated with the worship of the God 
of the seductive flute. But Mr. Sen repeatedly insists that the love dis- 
cussed in the literature he has so closely studied is spiritual and mystic, 
although usually presented in sensuous garb. Ghaitanya who had fre- 
quent ecstasies of spiritual joy ; Bupa, who classified the emotions of 
love in 360 groups and the other authors whose careers are here traced 
were hermits of unspotted life and religious devotion. The old passion- 
ate desire for union which they taught is still dominant in modem 
Bengali literature not directly Vaisnava in import. As Mr. J. D. Ander- 
son points out in his preface, the influence of Ohaitanya's teaching may 
be detected in the mystical verses of Tagore. ' 

From a long review in the Times Literary Supplement, 26th April, 
1918 :— 

" This delightful and interesting little book is the outcome of a 
series of lectures supplementing the learned discourses which Mr. Sen 
made the material of his " Baisnava Literature of Mediseval Bengal " 
reviewed by us on August 2, 1917. 

It is an authentic record of the religious emotion and thought of 
that wonderful land of Bengal which few of its Western rulers, we sus- 
pect, have rightly comprehended, not from lack of friendly sympathy 
but simply from want of precisely what Mr. Sen better than any one 
living, better than Sir Eabindranath Tagore himself, can supply. 

It is indeed, no easy matter for a Western Protestant to comprehend, 
save by friendship and sympathy with just such a pious Hindu as Mr. 
Sen, what is the doctrine of an istadevata, a " favourite deity " of 
Hindu pious ndoration. In his native tongue Mr. Sen has written charm- 
ing little books, based on ancient legends, which bring us very naer 
the heart of this simple mystery, akin, we suppose, to the cult of parti- 
cular saints in Catholic countries. Such for instance, is his charming 



416 OPINIONS 

tale of " Sati, " the Aryan spoaae of the rongh Himalayan ascetic God 
Sira. The tale is dedicated, in words of delightfully candid respect 
and afEection, to the devoted and loving wives of Bengal, whose virtues 
as wives and mothers are the admiration of all who know their country. 
Your pious Vaisnava can, without any hesitation or difBculty, transfer 
his thoughts from the symbolical amorism of Krishna to that other 
strange creation-legend of Him of the Blue Throat who, to save God's 
creatures, swallowed the poison cast up at the Churning of the Ocean 
and bears the mystic stigma to this day. Well, we have our traditions, 
legends, mysteries, and as Miss Underhill and others tell us, our own 
ecstatic mystics, who find such ineffable joy in loving God as, our 
Hindu friends tell us, the divine Badba experienced in her sweet anr- 
render to the inspired wooing of Krishna. The important thing for us, 
as students of life and literature is to note how these old communal 
beliefs influence and develop that wonderful record of human thought 
and emotion wrought for us by the imaginative writers of verse and 
prose, the patient artists of the pen. 

When all is said, there remains the old indefinable charm which 
attaches to all that Dines Chandra Sen writes, whether in English or 
his native Bengali, In his book breathe a native candour and piety 
which somehow remind us of the classical writers familiar to our boy- 
hood. In truth, he is a belated contemporary of, say, Plutarch, and 
attacks his biographical task in much the same spirit. We hope his 
latest book will be widely (and sympathetically) read." 

J. D. Anderson, Esq. — retired I.C.S., Professor, Cambridge Univer- 
sity : — 1 have read more than half of it. I propose to send with it, if 
circumstances leave me the courage to write it, a short Preface (which 
I hope you will read with pleasure even if j ou do not think it worth 
publication) explaining why, in the judgment of a very old student 
of all your works, your book should be read not only in Calcutta, but 
in London and Paris, and Oxford and Cambridge. I have read it and 
am reading it with great delight and profit and very real sympathy. 
Think how great must be the charm of your topic and your treatment 
when in this awful year of anxiety and sorrow, the reading of your 
delightful MS. has given me rest and refreshment in a time when every 
post, every knock at the door, may bring us sorrow. 

I write this in a frantic hurry the maU goes to-day — in order to 
go back to your most interesting and fascinating pages. 

HISTORY OF THE BENGALI LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE : 

Extract from a long review by Sylvain Levi (Paris) in the " Revue 
Critique " Jan. 1915 ;^(translated for the Bengalee). 

" One cannot praise too highly the work of Mr. Sen. A profound 
and original erudition has been associated with a vivid imagination. 
The works which he analyses are brought back to life with the con- 
sciousness of the original authors, with the movement of the multitudes 
who patronised them and with the landscape which encircled them. 
The historian, though relying on his documents, has the temperament 
of an epic poet. He has likewise inherited the lyrical genius of his 
race. His enthusiastic sympathy vibrates through all his descriptions. 
Convinced as every Hindu is of the superiority of the Brahmanio 
civilization, he exalts its glories and palliates its shortcomings, if he 
doeo not approve of them he would excuse them. He tries to be just 
to Buddhism and Islam ; in the main he is grateful to them for their 
contribution to the making of India. He praises with eloquent ardour 
the early English missionaries of Christianity, 



OPINIONS 417 

The appreciation of life so rare in onr book-knowledge, runs 
throughout the work ; one reads these thousand pages with a snstaizied 
interest ; and one losf s sight of the enormcns labour which it 
presupposes ; one easily slips into the treasure of information whiih 
it presents. The individual extri^ots quoted at the bottom of the pages 
offers a uniqae anthology of Bengali. The linguistic remarks scattered 
in the extracts abound in new and precious materials. Mr. Sen has 
given to his country a model which it would be difficult to surpass j 
we only wish tha,; it may provoke in other parts of India emulations 
to follow it." 

THE FOLK LITERATURE OF BENGAL, BY RAI SAHEB 
DINBSH CHANDRA SEN, B.A., published by the Calcutta University. 
Demy 8vo, pp 362. With a foreward by W. R. Gourlay, M.A., I.C.8., 
CLE., C S.I., from a long review in the TIMES LITERARY SUPPLE- 
MENT, MAY 13, 1920. 

" Those who are acquainted (we hope there are many) with Mr. 
Sen's other works, the outcome of lectures delivered to Calcutta 
University under-graduates in the author's function as Ramtann 
Lahiry Research Fellow in the History of the Bengali Language andj 
Literature, will know exactly what to expect of his present delightful 
excursion into Bengali Folk-lore. Mr. Sen thinks in Bengali, he thinks 
Bengali th ughts, he remains a pious Hindu, though his Hindu ideas 
are touched and stirred by contact with many kindly and admiring 
English friends. He is the better fitted to explain Bengal to the outer 
world, for he loves his native province with all his heart. He has no 
doubts as to the venerable origins, the sound philosophy, the artistic 
powers, the suggestive beauty, all the many charms of the Bengali 
Saraswati, the sweet and smiling goddess, muse and deity alike, the 
inspirer and patron of a long line of men of literature and learning too 
little known to the self-satisfied West. 

A Hindu he remains thinking Hindu thoughts, retaining proud and 
happy memories of his Hindu childhood and of the kind old men and 
women who fed his childish imagination with old-world rhymes, with 
tbe quaintly primitive Bengali versions of the stately epics of Sanskrit 
scripture, with tales even more primitive handed down by word of 
mouth by pious mothers, relics perhaps of a culture which preceded 
the advent of Hinduism in Bengal. What makes Mi. Sen's books 
so delightful to us in Europe is ) recisely this indefinable Hindu 
quality specifically Bengali r.ither than Indian, something that fits 
itself with exquisite aptness to what we know of the scenery and 
climate of the Gangetic delta, where Mr Sen was born, and where 
he has spent the life as a schoolmaster in Eastern Bengal, a land of 
wide shining mires and hnge slow-moving rivers where the boatman 
sings ancient legends as he lazily plies the oar and the cowherd lads 
on the low grassy banks of Meghna and Dhaleswari chant plaintiTe 
rhymes that Warren Hastings may have heard as he " proceeded up 
country " in bis spicious " bud^erow." 

All these pleasant old rhymes and tales Mr. Sen lovea with more 
than patriotic emotions and admiration and this sentiment he contrives 
to imiart to his readers, even through the difficult and laborious 
medium of a foreign language." 

JULES BLOCH — " I have just finished the romantic stoyy of 
Chandravati (given in the Bengali Bamayanas), May I congratulate ypa 
on the good and well deserved luck of having disc vered her after so 
many others and having added that new gem to the crown of Bengali 
Literature. 



41 8 OPINIONS 

I cannot speak to you in detail of your chapters on the charac- 
teristics of the Bengali Ramiyanas and on Tiilsidas, I had only to learn 
from what you say and thank you for helping rae and many others to 
get a little of that direct understanding and feeling of the literary and 
emotional value of those poems in general and Krittivas in particular. 
I hope your devotion to Bengali Literature will be rewarded by a 
growing popularity of that literature in India and in Europe ; and also 
that young scholars will follow your example and your direction in 
continuing your studies, literary and philological." 

SIR GEORGE GRIERSON— " I must write to thank you for your 
two valued gifts of the " Folk Literature of Bengal " and " The Bengali 
Ramayanas." I delayed acknowledging them till I had read them 
through. I have been greatly interested by both, and owe you a debt 
of gratitude for the immense amount of important information con- 
tained in them, 

I add to this letter a few notes which the perusal of your books 
has suggested to me. Perhaps you will find them useful. 

I hope that you will be spared to us to write many more such 
books." 

De. WILLIAM CROOKE, O.I.E., EDITOR OF "FOLK LORE"— "I 
have read them (" Polk Literature of Bengal" and " The Bengali Rama- 
yanas ") With much interest. They seem to me to be a very valuabla 
contribution to the study of tje religion and folk-lore of Bengal. I 
congratulate you on the success of your work and I shall be glad to 
receive copies of any other work which you may write on the same 
subjects." 

H. BEVERIDGE— " Of the two books I must say that I like best 
the Bengali Ramayanas. Your book on Bengali folk lore is also 
valuable " (from s letter of 12 pages containing a critical review of 
the two books), 

FROM THE TIMES LITERARY SUPPLEMENT, APRIL 7, 1921. 

" The Bengali Ramayanas " by Rai Saheb Dinesh Chandra Sen 
(published by the University of Calcutta). 

The Indian Epics deserve closer study than they have hitherto 
received at the hands of the average Englishmen of cultu'-e. Apart 
from the interest of the main themes, the wealth of imagery and the 
beauty of many of the episodes, they are storehouses of information 
upon the ancient life of India and a key to the origin of customs 
which still live. Moreover they show many curious afiBnities to Greek 
literature which suggest the existence of legends common to both 
countries. The Ring of Polycrates is reproduced in other conditiOi.s in 
the " Sakuntala" the Alcestis has its counterpart in the story of Savitri, 
and the chief of Pandavas descends into hell in the manner of Odysseus 
though on a nobler errand. 

The main theme of these lectures is the transformation of the old 
majestic Sanskrit epic as it came from the hands of Valmiki to the 
more familiar and homely style of the modern Bengali versions. The 
Ramayana, we are told, is a protest against Buddhist monasticism, the 
glorification of the domestic virtues, proclaiming that there i» no need 
to look for salvation outside the home. The Bergali versions, which 
reducing the grandeur of the heroic characters, to the level of ordinary 
mortals, bring the epic within the reach of the humblest peasant ; 
they have their own virtues, just as the simple narrative of the Gospels 
has its own charm, though it be different in kind from that of Isaiah's 



OPINIONS 4l9 

majestic cadences. Thus in the Sanskrit poem " Kaucaija " Bama's 
mother is sacrificing to Fire when she hears of her son's exile ; she does 
not flinch, but continues the sacrifice in the spirit of Greek tragedy, 
merely altering the character of her prayer. In the Bengali version 
she becomes a woman, giving vent to lamentations, such as one hears 
every day in modern India. In the Nibelnngeulied oue sees the same 
kind of transformation from the old Norse sagas to the atmosphere of 
medifflval chivalry. 

The author approaches his subject in that spirit of reverence which 
is the due of all great literature, and to him, Valmiki's Bamayana is 
the greatest literature in the world. The fact does not blunt his critical 
faculty ; rather does it sharpen it, for, as he says in the preface, 
" historical research and the truths to which it leads do not interfere 
with faith," neither do they stand in the way of admiration. He sees 
more in the Bamayana than the mere collection of legends into a 
Sanskrit masterpiece from which various versions have been made 
from time to time. He shows us how, as the centuries proceeded, 
each successive version was influenced by the spirit of the age, how 
the story became adapted to the purposes of rellgi us propaganda, how 
in the interests of the Vaisnaba cult the hero Bama became the divine 
avatar of Yishnu, even at the risk of absurd situations. He takes ns 
through the age of the Sakti influence, of Bamananda's philosophy and 
its revolt against Mahomedan iconoclasm, of the flippant immorality 
of the eighteenth century. "Those Bengali Bamayanas," he says, 
" have thus quite an encyclopaedic character, comprising, along with 
the story of Bama, current theologies, folk-tales and the poetry of 
rural Bengal of the age when they were composed." To him the 
Bamayan is a yellow primrose, but it is something more, * * • • 
To the student of folk-lore these lectures are to be recommended as an 
earnest and loving study of a fascinating subject." 

From the " Bevista Trimestrale di studi Filosofici e Beligiosi — 
■o • Ti I, A rf \, " "^^^ University of Calcutta continues with 
Kai Jiaiiadur umesn- ^^^^^ alacrity, the fine series of its publica- 
chandra bens bo\k ^^^^^ ^.-^^^^ testifying to the high scientific 
Literature of Bengal. preparation (issuing out) of those indigenous 
teachers. This volume devoted to the popular tales of Bengal also 
constitutes a contribution of t>e first rank to such a subject. The 
tracing of the History of the Bengali language and literature in this 
University is one of the most well deserved studies of Bengal. To 
it is due, in fact, the monumental and now classical History of the 
Bengali Language and Literature (1912);— in which, so far as our studies 
go, we value most the accurate estimate of the influence of Chaitanyar 
on that literature— accompanied by the grand Bengali Anthology 
Banga Sahitya Parichaya, 1914, and then above all the pleasing and 
erudite researches on Vaishnab literature and the connected religious 
reform of Chaitanya. 

A world wholly legendary depicted with the homely tenderness in 
most secluded locality of Bengal and half conceived in the Buddhistic 
epoch with delicate phantasy and fondness ; the world in which Babindra- 
nath Tagore ultimately attained his full growth is revived with every 
seduction of art in the luminous pages of this beautiful book. The 
author came in touch with this in his first days of youth when he was 
a village teacher in East Bengal and he now wishes to reveal it by 
gathering together the most secluded spirit and also the legend 
collected in four delicious volumes of D. B. Maznmdar, yet to be 
tranalated. 



420 OPINIONS 



' A spirit of reminciation in the devotion of wives in the love 
of tender and sorrowful ladies, in eagerness for patient sacrifice carry us 
back, as we have said, to the Buddhistic epoch of Bengal ; it rises as an 
ideal of life and is transmitted to future generations traversed by the 
Massalmaui faith which also is pervaded by so many Buddhistic 
elements. Malancha, the sublime female incarnation of such an ideal — 
whose legend is translated in the last pages of this volume — the Lady 
wholly spiritual, a soul heroic in its devoted renunciation, mistress of 
her body who reveals in herself qualities that essentially belong to idea, 
a, -/creature of the s^ul, shaped by the aspiration to come into contact 
with the external world. Malancha loses her eyes and her hands, 
but so strong is her desire to see her husband that her eyes grow again 
and snch ■ is her desire to serve him that her hands also grow again. 

In the popular narration the prose often assumes a poetic movement 
and metrical form. The archaic language that reminds us of remote 
antiquity is converted into lyrio charm and becomes knotty in the prose, 
makiDg us think pensively of the Vedic hymnology that entered the 
epic of Mahavarat. 

[Translated from the Original Italian.] 

Extraetfrom the 'Times, dated the 7th April, Thursday, 1922. 
EPICS OF BENGAL. 
The Bengali Ramayanas. By Rai Saheb Dikeshoh akdba Sen'. 
(Published by the University of Calcutta. Es. 14 2a.) 

The Indian epics deserve closer study than they have hitherto 
received at the hands of the average Englishman of culture. Apart 
from the interest of the main themes, the wealth of imagery and the 
beauty of many of the episodes, they are storehouses of information 
upon the ancient life of India and a key to the origin of customs 
which still live. Moreover, they show many curious affinities to Greek 
literature, which suggest the existence of legends common to both 
countries. The Ring of Polycrates is reproduced in other conditions 
in the " Sakuntala," the Alceefis has its counterpart in the story of 
Savitri, and the chief of the Pandavas descends into hell in the 
manner of Odysseus, though on a nobler errand. 

The main theme of these lectures is the transformation of the old 
diajestic Sanskrit epic as it came from the hands of Valmiki to the 
more familiar and homely style of the modern Bengali versions. The 
Ramayana, we are told, is a protest againt Buddhist monasticism, the 
glorification of the domestic virtues, proclaiming that there is no need 
to look for salvation outside the hime. The Bengali versions, while 
reducing the grandeur of the heroic characters to the level of ordinary 
mortals, bring the epic within the reach of the humblest peasant j 
Ijhey have their owu virtues, just as the simple narrative of the 
Gveipela has its own charm, though it be different in kind from that 
of Isaiah's majestic cadences. Thus in the Sanskrit poem " Kau9alya" 
Rama's mother is sacrificing to Fire when she hears of her son's exile ; 
she does not flinch, but continues the sacrifice in the spirit of Greek 
tragedy, merely altering the character of her prayer. In the Bengali 
version she becomes An ordinary Bengali woman, giving vent to 
lamentations such as one hoars every day in m odern India. In the 
ITiibelnngenlied one sees the same kind of transformation from the old 
Norse sagas to the atmosphere of medieval chivalry. 



OPINIONS 4^1 

The author approaches his subject in that spirit of reverence ■which 
is the due of all great literature, and to him Valmiki's Eamayana is 
the greatest literature in the world. The fact does not blunt his 
critical faculty ; rather does it sharpen it, for, as he says in the preface, 
" historical research and the truths to which it leads do not interfere 
with faith," neither do they stand in the way of admiration. He sees 
more in the Eamayana than the mere collection of legends into a 
Sanskrit masterpiece from which various versions have been made 
from time to time. He shows us how, as the centuries proceeded, 
each successive version was influenced by the spirit of the age, how 
the story became adapted to the purposes of religions propaganda,' 
how in the interests of the Vaishnava cult the hero Rama became the 
divine avatar of Vishnu, even at the risk of absurd situations. He 
takes us through the age of the Sakti influence, of Bamananda's 
philosophy and its revolt against Mahomedan iconoclasm, of the 
flippant immorality of the eighteenth century. " These Bengali 
Bamayanas," he says, " have thus quite an encyclopsedio character^ 
comprising, along with the story of Rama, current theologies, folk-tales, 
and the poetry of rural Bengal of the age when they were composed." 
To him the Bamayana is a yellow primrose, but it is something more ; 
and if some of his theories seem over-fanciful, at least they have the 
merit of sincerity. To the student of folklore these lectures are to be 
recommended as an earnest and loving study of a fascinating subject. 

FROM A REVIEW IN THE "FOLK LORE." 

Folklore in Bengal. 

The Bbn&ali Kamayans : Leciurbs delivered at the Calcotta, 
University in 1916. By Bai Sahib Dineshchandra Ben, B.A. 
Published by the University of Calcutta. 1920. 

The Folk-Liieeatdre of Bengal: Lectdkes delivered at the 
Calcutta University in 1917. By the same Author. Published 
by the University of Calcutta. 1920. 

-It is a matter of congratulation that the author of these two 
volumes of lectures, an eminent Bengali scholar and author of an 
important work. The History of Bengali Language and Literature, 
has devoted his attention to the folklore of his country, and that a 
lectirreship on this subject has been founded in the University of 
Calcutta. In the first series of lectures he considers the questions 
connected with the Bengali versions of the great Indian epic, the 
" Eamayana " the work of Valmiki. The first result of his analysis 
of the poem is that, as might have been anticipated, the poet used 
much of the current folk- tradition. Many incidents in the epic 
closely resemble tales in the Buddhist Jataka. The second theory 
suggested is that originally the cycle of legends connected with the 
demigod Btlma and the demon Ravana Jvere distinct, and that it was 
left for the poet to combine them into one consistent narrative. 

The second course of lectures deals with a series of folk-tales 
current among Musalmans in Bengal, which evidently embody early 
Hindu tradition. The influence of women in preserving these tales, 
and particularly the scraps of poetry embodied in them, is illustrated 
in an interesting way, and he makes an important suggestion that 
tales of the Middle Kingdom, or the Upper Ganges Valley, were 
conveyed by the crews of ships sailing from the coast of Bengal to, 
Persia, and thus were communicated to the people of the West long 



i'H Opinions 

before amy translations of collections like the Panchatantra or 
Hitopadesa were available. 

The learned author of these lectures is doing admirable work in a 
field hitherto unexplored, and the University of Calcutta deserves 
hearty commendation in its efforts to encourage the study of Indian 
folklore. 

TIMES LITBRART SUPPLEMENT MAT 13, 1920. 

The Folk-loee of Bengal. 

The Folk-liteeattire of Bkngal : By Rai Sahib Dineshchandra 
Sen. (Calcutta University Press.). 

Those who are acquainted (we hope they are many) with Mr. Sen's 
other works, the outcome of lectures delivered to Calcutta under- 
graduates in the author's function as Ramtanu Lahiri Research Fellow 
in the History of the Bengali Language and Literature, will know 
exactly what to expect of his present delightful excursion into Bengali 
Folk-lore. There is some humour, to begin with, in the odd fact 
that he should be lecturing to Bengali lads on Bengali nursery tales 
in English. Mr. Sen is not, and does not profess to be, one of thoie 
remarkable Bengalis who, like Sir Rabindranath Tagore, for example, 
are perfectly bilingual to the extent of being able to think with 
equal ease, and write with equal felicity and justness of expression, 
in both languages. Let not this be regarded as a sin in the Ramtanu 
L ahiri Fellow. He thinks in Bengali, he thinks Bengali thoughts, 
he remains a pious Hindu, though his Hindu ideas are touched and 
stirred by contact with many kindly and admiring English friends. 
He is the better fitted to explain Bengal to the outer world. For he 
loves his native province with all his heart. He has no doubts as to 
the venerable origins, the sound philosophy, the artistic powers, 
the suggestive beauty, all the many charms of the Bengali Saraswati, 
the sweet and smiling goddess, muse and deity alike, the inspirer 
and patron of a long line of men of literature and learning too little 
known to the self-satisfied and incurious West. 

A Hindu he remains, thinking Hindu thoughts, retaining prond and 
b^py memories of his childhood and of the kind old men and women 
who fied his childish imagination with old world rhymes, with the 
quaintly primitive Bengali versions of the stately epics of Sanskrit 
Scriptures with tales even more primitive, handed down by word of 
mouth by pions mothers, relics, perhaps, of a culture which preceded 
the advent of Hinduism in Bengal. What makes Mr. Sen's books so 
delightful to us in Europe is precisely this indefinable Hindu quality, 
specifically Bengali rather than Indian, something that fits itself with 
exquisite aptness to what he knows of the scenery and climate of the 
Gangetic delta, where Mr. Sen was bom, and where he has spent the 
whole time of his busy life as a student of his native literature. 
He began life as a village school master in Eastern Bengal, a land of 
wide shining meres and huge slow-moving rivers, where the boat- 
man sings ancient legends as he lazily plies the oar, and the cow- 
herd lads on the low grassy banks of Meghna or Dhaleswari chant 
plaintive rhymes that Warren Hastings may have heard as he 
" proceeded up country " in his spacious " budgerow." 

All these pleasant old rhymes and tales Mr. Sen loves with a more 
than patriotic emotion and admiration, and this sentiment he 
contrives to impart to his readers, even through the difficult and 
laborious medium of a foreign language. We can imagine his lectures to 



OPINIONS 428 

be pleasant by convereional than eloquent in the academical faBhion. 
He tells the lads before him what life-long pleasure he has taken in the 
hereditary legends he shares with them. But in the present volumes, 
for example, he is driven to assume from time to time the austerity 
of a professional student of a comparative folk-lore, and so strays 
(unwittingly, we may be sure) into the region of heated controversy. 
Mr. Gourlay, distinguished administrator and student of the History of 
Bengal, has given Mr. Sen a friendly fore-word. It is evident that this 
professional element in Mr. Sen's work has a little frightened his kindly 
sponsor. " When I read the author's enthnasistic appriciation," he says, 
" of Bengali folk tales, the thought crossed my mind that perhaps the 
Eai Sahib's patriotism had affected his judgment ; but after I had 
read the translation of the beautiful story of Malanohamala, I went 
back to the first lecture, and I knew that what he said was true." 

Mr. Gourlay has expressed a hope that Mr. Sen will make a 
collection of Bengali folk tales. It must be admitted that the late 
Kev. Lalbehari Dey's tales may well be supplemented. But surely 
Mr. Gourlay knows Daksina Ranjan Mazumdar's four wonderful 
and wholly delightful volumes, one of them with a preface of apprecia- 
tion by Sir Kabindranath Tagore himself. Mr. Maznmdar may well 
claim to be the Grimm of Bengal, and Mr. Sen has repeatedly 
acknowledged his debt to his unwearied diligence in collecting Bengali 
folk-tales. The wonder is that no one has yet translated the marvels 
of " Thakurdadar Jhuli," " Thakurmar Jhuli," " Thandidir Thale " 
and " Dadamahasayer Thali." Appropriately illustrated, sympatheti- 
cally rendered, they may yet be the delight of Western nurseries, 
and form the best, the most natural and easy of introduction to Indian 
thought and literature. There are other admirable works for the 
nursery in Bengali, such as Miss Sita Devi's " Niret Gurur Kahini " 
and the volume of Hindustani Fairy tales translated by her and her 
sister. But there is only one Majumdar, and we heartily hope that 
Mr. Sen's version of his Malancha Mala in this volume will draw the 
attention of European students of Indian folk-lore to the four excellent 
collections we have mentioned. Their style, subtlety, archaic yet 
colloquial, may well puzzle the trnnslator, for not every one of us has 
the pen of a Charles Perrault. But the task is well worth attempting. 
Meanwhile Mr. Sen does well to remind us that two of the best of 
La Fontaine's Fables are taken from the " Panohatantra." 

Bengali Ramatans by D, C. Sen, from a review in the Journal of 
Royal Asiatic Society by Sir George Grierson — 

This is the most valuable contribution to the literature on the 
Rama-saga which has appeared since Professor Jacobi's work 
on the EamSyana was published in 1893. The latter was confined to 
VSlmiki's fanions epic, and the present volume, from the pen of the 
veteran author of the History of Bengali Language and Literature, 
carries the inquiry on to a further stage, and throws light both on 
the origins of the story and on its later developments. 

The subject covers so wide a ground, and its treatment exhibits 
so wide a field of Indian learning that, within the limited space 
available, it is impossible to do more than indicate the more salient 
points adduced by the author, and, perhaps, to add a few new items 
of information. 

It has long been admitted that the core of the Sanskrit RamSyana — 
the portion written by VSlmiki himself — consists (with a few 
interpolations) of the second to the sixth books. The first and the 
seventh, in which BSma is elevated from the stage of a heroic mortal 



3'24! OTINIONS 

to divinifiy, are later additions. The Bai Saheb, acceptiig these condi- 
tions, has bepn able to dispel part of the darkness fvhich has hitherto 
enveloped the sources of VSlmiki's poem, and to trace its origin to 
thi-ee distinct stories, which the great poet combined into i single epic. 

The oldest version is that contained in the Daparatha Jataka,^ in 
which Sits is said to be Kama's sister. RSma is banished to the Himalaya, 
being accompanied by her and Laksmana — under much the Fame story 
of palace intrigae as that told by Valmiki, — and returns to reign after 
twelve years. He then r^arries his sister Siia, and they live happy 
ever afterwards. She is not abducted by nnyone, and there ia no 
mention either of HanumSn or of ESvana. 

The second strand of the epic belongs to Southern India, where 
there grew up a cycle of legends " about a grand and noble BrShmana. ' 
Most of these stories are said to be collected in the Jaina Bam&yana 
of Hemacandra, a work which I have not seen, and which is described 
by our author as far more a history of RSvana than of Bama. On 
the other hand, a Buddhist work — the LaftkavatSra Siitra — narrates 
a long discourse which RSvana held with the Buddha, and claims 
him as a follower of MaliSySna Buddhism ! He was thus revered by 
Hindiis, Jainas, and Buddhists alike. 

■ ' The third strand was the floating group of legends related to ape- 
worship once widely current in India. In these HanumSn was at first 
connected with Saivism, and there are still extant stoiijs telling how 
Siva made him over to Laksmana for service under Bama. Even at 
the present day it is not only the devotees of Vi?nu who adore him, 
and Saivas, but the crypto- Buddhists of Orissa claim him as a powerful 
divinity. 

From materials taken from each of these three sources VSImiki 
welded together his immortal poem. He refused sanction to the 
ancient legend that the STta whom BSma married was his sister, but 
gave no hint as to her parentage. This was supplied in later works, 
such as the Adbhuta BSmSiyana — a wonderful collection of old and 
fantastic traditions -in which she is described as the daughter of 
Mandddari, the wife of her abductor.* 

After thus disonssing the origins of the Bama-saga, and its develop- 
ment by VSlmIki, the Rai Saheb proceeds to the main snbject of 
his work — the BSmayanas of Bengal. None of them are translations 
of the Sanskrit epic. Like the celebrated Rama-carita-manasa of 
TulasI Dasa, each author tells his story in his own way, weaving into 
it his own thoughts and ancient traditions current in his neighbourhood. 
They secured their general popularity by the thorough Bengalization 

' This was long ago recognized by A, Weber. See Indian Antiquary, 
Vol. i, p. 121. 

^ We find much of this in that portion of the Uttara Kanda which 
Jacobi calls the HavaneiS. 

^ Numerous temples in Southern India are said to have been 
founded by Bavana (see Bombay Oazetteer, I, i, 190 454, n. 1 ; XV, ii, 76, 
•290 fE., 341), He is said to have performed his celebrated austerities at 
Gokarna, in Kanara (Bombay Presidency), a district which abounds in 
legends about him. Some of these have spread to very distant parts 
of India. For instance, the story of the loan to him of Siva's " selt- 
li}}ga " (Oaz. XV, 29C) reappears in the Kashmiri Ramayana. 

* Vide JBAS., 1921, p. 422. This story appears to have been widely 
spread. It is popular in Kashmir. According to ihe Jaina Uitai-a 
Purana, quoted by our author she was a daughter of RSvana himself. 



OPINIONS 425 

of their theme. The scenery, the manners and customs, the religions 
rites, the very food, although placed in LankS, are all those familiar 
to Bengal. The most famous, and one of the oldest, of these 
Ramayanas is that of Kyttivasa (fourteenth century). All these 
features are already found there, but later writers, falling under the 
influence of the Vai§nava revival of Oaitanya, not only filled their 
poems vpith Vai^nava doctrine and with theories about hhdkti, bat 
even transferred legends concerning Caitanya to pseudo-prototypes in 
the war before Lanka. ^ Space will not permit me to mention all 
Krttivasa's successors. Each had his own excellencies and his own 
defects. I therefore confine myself to calling attention to the 
incomplete ESmftyana of the Mymensingh poetess OandrSvatl. In one 
of her poems she tells her own beautiful and pathetic story, and there 
oan be no doubt but that her private griefs, nobly borne, inspired the 
pathos with which her tale of Sita's woes is distinguished. It is interest- 
ing that, like one or two other authors, she ascribes Sita's banishment 
to BSma's groundless jealousy, A treacherous sister-in-law, 
daughter of Kaikeyi, named KuknS, persuaded Sits, much against her 
will, to draw for her » portrait of RSvana. She then showed this to 
E5ma as a proof that his wife loved, and still longed for her cruel 
abdnctor. This story was not invented by the poetess. It must have 
been one of those long orally current, but not recorded by VSlmiki 
or by the writer of the seventh book of the Sanskrit poem, for it re- 
appears in the Kashmiri RSmayana to which I have previously alluded. 

A few words may also be devoted to another curious version of the 
old tradition. Under various orthodox names Buddhism has survived 
in Orissa to the present day, and, in the seventeenth century, one 
BSmananda openly declared himself to be an incarnation of the Buddha 
and, to prove it, composed a Bama-Ula, or Eam&yana. I have already 
alluded to the fact that Hauuman was worshipped by this Orissa 
Buddhists. It need not therefore surprise us that Ramauanda stated 
that he wrote his book under the ape-god's inspiration. 

I have drawn attention to only a few features of this excellent wort 
in the hope that my remarks will induce those interested in the subject 
to buy the book and study it for themselvei. It deserves attention, 
even if we do not accept all that its author wishes to prove. As a collec- 
tion of hitherto unknown facts bearing on the development of the 
Rama-saga in Bengal it is unique. 

1 The Bengali version of the conversion of the hunter VslmJki is 
worth noting for the light it throws on the connexion of Bengali with 
MSgadhi Prakrit, Narada tried to teach him to pronounce Rama's 
name, but he could not do so owing to sin having paralysed his tongue. 
NSrada succeeded in getting him to say mada (pronounced mara), 
meaning "dead." This is the Magadhi Prakrit tooSS (Vr. xi, 15). It 
is peculiar to the Bengali language, the more western word being mara. 
Narada next got him to use this western pronunciation, and to repeat 
the word rapidly several times, — thus, maramaramaramara. It will be 
seen that in this way Talmiki, without his paralysed tongue knowing 
it, uttered the word Rama, and thus became sufficiently holy to become 
converted. Apropos of the hhdkti influence, on page 127, there is a 
story about Niz5mn'd-din Anlia and a robbei, which recalls the finale of 
the Tannhanser. The robber is told that he cannot hope for 
forgiveness till a certain dead tree bears leaves. In process of time he 
does feel true repentance, and the dead trunk becomes at once covered 
with green leaves from top to bottom. 



E?irfiR>^:SSfn!S 



it[l'iiW-'^iHTiW'&\'M^, 







